   'Brexit forced me to stop rearing sheep and ended 200 years of farm tradition' i-news June 28, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 1159 words Byline: Molly Blackall Body   Life as a farmer in the rugged peaks of Eryri National Park is not easy. The weather can be merciless, the days long, the agriculture unpredictable. But there has been a new challenge in the past three years: Brexit. Britain's departure from the European Union led to seismic changes in agricultural policy and support for farmers across the UK, ending European subsidy schemes and ushering in new trade deals. Despite the magnitude of the shift, discussion of Brexit's impact on the UK has been largely absent from the general election campaigns. It is in stark contrast to the 2019 poll, when Boris Johnson ran on the slogan "Get Brexit Done" and secured a landslide victory. With just days to go until polls open, i is travelling across all four nations to meet some of those most affected by Brexit, finding out how life has changed for them and how the experience might affect their vote on 4 July. Following the Brexit vote, Snowdonia farmer Paul Williams says he was forced to stop rearing sheep for the first time in his farm's 200-year history. "Traditionally we've been a beef and sheep farm, as are most of the farms around us. At the time, half our sheep were a mountain flock, and 90 per cent of the lambs from that flock were destined for the EU export market. I saw it as an unnecessary risk to the business," he says, sitting in the garden of his farmhouse, flanked by the dramatic slopes of Snowdonia. "We decided as a family that we wanted to take that risk element out of the business - primarily because of Brexit. There were other reasons, but that was one of the big ones - so we decided to go out of sheep production. "It was a huge step and I know my neighbours were thinking I was absolutely crazy. We didn't take it lightly." Like many farmers, Mr Williams, a remain voter, had been receiving payments from the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). While these payments have been replaced by the UK Government, farmers and the Welsh Government have raised concerns about the post-Brexit arrangement. Westminster reduced the amount of CAP replacement funding it gave to Wales by £243m between 2021 and 2024 compared to the funding the country would have received had it remained in the EU, according to the Welsh Government. There are also concerns about the future of the funding, which is now budgeted annually rather than every five to seven years, as it was in the EU. As the CAP replacement funding is not ringfenced by the Welsh Government, there are also fears it could potentially be eroded. This instability has a real-world cost for farmers, according to Mr Williams. "[Pre-Brexit], you could go to the bank and say look, that money is guaranteed to come in every year, regardless of what we do or produce," he says. "We don't have that certainty any more." The impact of Brexit on farmers has been compounded by the cost of living crisis and the war in Ukraine, with Mr Williams estimating that the price of fertiliser has risen 60 per cent since February 2022. But he fears things may yet get worse. In December 2021, the UK Government signed a post-Brexit trade deal with Australia and New Zealand, paving the way for an influx of beef and lamb imports to Britain. Mr Williams says he is "absolutely concerned" about the deal's impact on British farming. "Don't get me wrong. It's a reality that we're in a global marketplace, and you have to accept that… The issue comes to when products come in, especially red meats, at a much lower standard than what we're held to. Because once you lower any product standards, basically all you do is cheapen the product," he says. "If people want an environmentally-friendly farming system, that's not a problem. But that comes at a cost. How can I compete if my meat is on the shelf in any supermarket, at a premium on Australian imported beef ?" The track record of the Labour Government in Wales is also an issue. "The past couple of years hasn't gone well for us as an agricultural industry with Labour. Because we're devolved in Wales, we've seen what a Labour Government has done or how it has managed things. It's probably unfair to reflect that on a possible UK Labour government… But here in Wales, we're not in a good place at the moment. "It'll be interesting to see the interaction between the two Labour governments, if indeed Labour comes into the UK Parliament. We've had 10 years basically of the Welsh Labour Government blaming the Conservative UK Government that there's no money." Hedd Pugh, who has farmed in Snowdonia for more than 40 years, says he lost thousands of pounds in income almost overnight. "Personally I don't think there's been any good things being out of Europe. I'm sure that a lot of people who did vote to get out of Europe will regret it," he adds. "The impact is going to be enormous over the next decade." Mr Pugh, who also voted remain, had adapted his farm to meet the requirements of the EU environmental funding scheme, planting "miles and miles of new hedges" and thousands of trees. "During the EU schemes you were told how many sheep you could keep on the mountain; that you couldn't do this and couldn't do that. So you've geared up to that over the years and all of a sudden it comes to an end, it's a cliff-edge," he says. The EU scheme accounted for more than a quarter of Mr Pugh's business, and he estimates he will receive only half as much under Habitat Wales, a Welsh Government scheme, equating to a 12.5 per cent loss of income. "I know some farmers in Wales who've lost just over 75 per cent," he says. "It was a huge blow." His concern is not only for the future of agriculture, but all that the industry brings with it. "When the money comes into agriculture and farming, we spend it in the shops. Here in Wales, we've got a Welsh language as well. That is very, very important. The Welsh Government need a million speakers by 2050; well, farmers and agriculture are key," he says. "The community around here, it's a very strong community of Welsh speakers. A lot goes on here. If agriculture doesn't thrive, the community and Welsh language in the rural areas won't survive either. We've got a school, a church, a chapel, a pub. It's very important we support all that." In other parts of Wales, farmers say they have suffered with post-Brexit labour shortages and have grown "increasingly frustrated at the five-year delays to border controls on imports of products of animal origin", according to the National Farmers' Union, which warns the UK is "at risk of animal and plant health disease outbreaks". A Welsh Government spokesperson said that working with the farming industry and other stakeholders was "key to achieving our shared goal of ensuring that farming in Wales has a long, successful, and vibrant future", where "our farmers produce the very best of Welsh food to the highest standards, while safeguarding our precious environment". I'm sure a lot of people who did vote to get out of Europe will regret it. The impact is going to be huge Load-Date: June 28, 2024  End of Document
