   14 HOURS HOLIDAY QUEUE NIGHTMARE; NEW BREXIT TRAVEL RULES Air and ferry delay warning The Sun (England) May 27, 2024 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 433 words Byline: CONOR MATCHETT Body   EXCLUSIVE by CONOR MATCHETT Political Editor SCOTS could face waits of 14 hours to go on holiday to Europe due to new Brexit travel restrictions, the SNP warned last night. Plans for the European Entry/ Exit System, which will register non-EU travellers arriving or leaving the EU, are set to be introduced later this year. Nats MP Gavin Newlands warned it could affect families travelling abroad during the October holidays. He said: "It is maddening that families in Scotland planning to go on holiday during the October week could face huge delays and queues of up to 14 hours or may have to cancel their holidays entirely." It comes after Kent County Council, which includes the Port of Dover, said the impact of the new system could be "much worse" than delays in 2022, which saw tourists stuck in queues for more than 15 hours due to tailbacks at the border due to Brexit restrictions. The new system was meant to be introduced in 2022 - before being delayed until May last year and again to later this year. Queues at border posts could be gigantic as travellers from non-EU countries, including the UK, have to scan their passports at self-service kiosks prior to crossing the border. This is instead of manual stamping of passports for visitors arriving and leaving the Schengen travel area on continental Europe. It will record the name, travel document, fingerprints and facial recognition images, as well as the date and place of entry and exit to the EU. And the need for new pictures and fingerprints could cause huge delays. SNP transport spokesman Mr Newlands said: "Brexit has been a disaster from the very beginning, pushing up the cost of living, causing chaos for holidaymakers and leaving businesses struggling. "But Westminster refuses to wake up to that reality, showing complete disregard for household budgets and businesses. Scotland's only escape from the chaos of Brexit - backed by both the Tories and Labour - is independence inside the EU." A spokesman for the Home Office said: "The launch of the EU Entry/Exit System is being overseen by the European Commission and Schengen states will be responsible for implementation at border crossing points. The UK Government has been working very closely with the EU Commission and the portals to minimise any impacts on border throughput of the planned EES. "We will continue to work very closely with all the portals, and all ministers are raising the importance of a flexible approach to implementing the EES in interactions with EU counterparts and the commission. There are no juxtaposed ports in Scotland." conor.matchett@thesun.co.uk Graphic    Brexit blame ... Mr NewlandsFlight drag ... getaway hellTHE SLOW LANE Departure hall misery is looming Load-Date: May 27, 2024  End of Document
