   150m Brexit boost for businessas Kemi cuts another 500 Brussels rules; CABINET MINISTER'S BONFIRE OF RED TAPE The Express May 14, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: FEATURES; Pg. 6,7 Length: 760 words Byline: Sam Lister Body   KEMI Badenoch is giving businesses a £150million-a-year Brexit boost by slashing leftover European red tape. The Business Secretary will cut another 500 rules imposed on the UK by Brussels by the end of the year. She will also announce that industry watchdogs such as Ofwat will be told to put growth at the heart of their work. Ms Badenoch told the Daily Express: "This Government is making the most of our Brexit freedoms to scrap or reform thousands of EU laws that have tied up businesses in unnecessary red tape for too long. "I'm committed to reducing the regulatory burden on companies, which in turn will help create more jobs and grow the UK economy." In an announcement this Thursday, she will set out plans to take businesses employing up to 500 people out of costly bureaucracy such as reporting on non-financial performance. The Government estimates 2,000 firms will benefit - and that having fewer forms to fill in will save around £150million a year. It follows on from work to scrap or reform thousands of EU regulations since Britain left the bloc. Changes to paperwork on the working time directive are estimated to save employers £1billion this year in what ministers view as a big Brexit win. The latest wave of red tape reduction follows a push from businesses to ease the burden. Small firms struggle to afford legal and accounting teams to deal with the paperwork around reporting and auditing requirements. The Business Secretary also wants regulators to be more proactive in boosting growth by taking account of the economy when making decisions. It follows the Competition and Markets Authority trying to block the biggest tech deal in history when Microsoft was attempting to buy games-maker Activision Blizzard. The deal was revised and later cleared. Ms Badenoch said regulators will not be asked to put the economy over other issues, such as water pollution in the case of Ofwat, but instead the issues should go hand in hand. Matthew Lesh, director of public policy at the Institute of Economic Affairs think tank, said the reforms show the significant economic impact that seemingly small changes can have. He added: "Boris Johnson's Brexit deal allowed Britain to chart its own course. However, the mere ability to self-govern does not guarantee effective governance; it is the manner in which that power is wielded that determines success or failure." He spoke after Rishi Sunak gave a wide-ranging speech in London that hailed Britain's bright Brexit future. The PM said his Government was "seizing the freedom and flexibility" that being outside the bloc offers. While the EU's default approach was top-down, precautionary regulation, he said, the UK could be more agile, encouraging innovation in everything from financial services to agriculture, healthcare to house building. He added: "We've always been an open, trading, maritime nation; and Brexit has given us the opportunity to trade even more. And we invent, discover and produce new products and services that the world wants to buy. "From aircraft wings in Filton to financial services in Glasgow to incredible cultural exports like film, music and TV or sports like the Premier League. Everywhere from rural Kenya to the cityscapes of South Korea, people stay up all times of day and night to watch their favourite British team. "It's no wonder that Brexit Britain has leapt above France, Japan and the Netherlands to become the world's fourth biggest exporter.And the more we export, the better our businesses will do, the more jobs we will create, the more wealth we will generate - right across our country." He said there were huge opportunities ahead as the world is transformed by www.technology.UK companies are pioneering offshore wind and exporting it around the world, he said, as well as generating innovations that have helped reduce the cost of wind energy by two-thirds. He added: "You can see the opportunity, too, in healthcare, giving people longer, healthier lives. "In Denmark, NovoNordisk created the Ozempic drug which is not only helping to tackle chronic disease globally but single-handedly grew Denmark's entire economy last year. "All this progress should show us that while this is one of the most dangerous periods we've ever known, it will also be one of the most transformational. And if we make the right choices, if we have a bold enough vision, then we should feel confidence, pride, and optimism that Britain's future is secure." OPINION: PAGE 12 'I am committed to reducing the regulatory burden on companies to help create more jobs and grow the economy' Graphic    Help for small firms...Business Secretary Kemi BadenochPicture: LEON NEAL/GETTY Load-Date: May 14, 2024  End of Document
