   "Will do everything I can to ensure Trump wins"; Brexit campaigner Nigel Farage reports back. He believes the EU is on the brink of collapse Die Welt (English) June 21, 2024 Friday  Copyright 2024 Axel Springer SE All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Pg. 6; No. 119 Length: 916 words Byline: Antonello Guerrera Body   You can hate him, love him, criticize him, despise him, call him an opportunistic xenophobe and a relentless shark as soon as he smells the blood of his opponents. But they will never get rid of him. "Because I'm a clairvoyant," he jokes - or not, as the Italian newspaper "La Repubblica ", which, like WELT, is part of the Leading European Newspaper Alliance, meets him after a meeting. He drinks a glass of red cabernet at one o'clock in the afternoon on an empty stomach. A small thing for someone who miraculously survived a plane crash and then testicular cancer in 2010. Nigel Farage is celebrating a comeback, yet again. After achieving the longed-for Brexit, he has now, at the age of 60, made another spectacular breakthrough in British politics: as party leader of Reform UK, a right-wing party that promises a tough fight against immigration and taxes for entrepreneurs who hire foreigners. He will be standing for the Clacton-on-Sea constituency in Essex. He has already failed to get into the Westminster parliament seven times. But this time he wants to make it.    WORLD:    Ultimately you, Nigel Farage, are doing the left a favor, do you realize that?    Nigel Farage: No, that's not true. The elections are basically already over: Starmer will win. But there's no way I'm going to help the Tories: We are Reform UK, the real opposition in Westminster, while the Tories, who disagree on everything, will be humiliated in this election. And they deserve it. They are traitors who have committed suicide.    In what way? in 2019, we contributed significantly to getting rid of Theresa May. And although we won the European elections with almost 33% and became the strongest party in Strasbourg, we gave way to Boris Johnson in the general election so that he could win and complete Brexit. But just look at what they have done: The country is literally in ruins, Brexit hasn't really gone through either and around 4.3 million people have immigrated to the UK since 2010. The Tories have betrayed the country, period. But then they decided to commit suicide in 2010, with David Cameron as Prime Minister: since then, the Tories have become social democrats, cut the defense budget and promoted mass immigration, the cult of the EU and environmental emissions to zero. So it serves them right.    Have they also betrayed you on Brexit? Definitely. Brexit actually gave us enormous power in terms of rules, laws and immigration, but the Tories didn't get any of that done. Not a single thing.    Is it really as if Brexit never happened? Nothing has been put into practice. Otherwise we wouldn't have had another 2.4 million new immigrants in the last two years. And even more so now, with Starmer in power, who will move closer to the EU again.    So Brexit was a flop then? Absolutely not. It just needs to be implemented properly. The exit from the EU and the constitutional changes following the 2016 referendum are massive and indisputable facts. But above all, Brexit 2016, together with Trump's victory, was the beginning of a broad populist front around the world.    You are a close friend of former US President Donald Trump. Will he return to the White House despite the scandals and the recent conviction in the Stormy Daniels porn star case? An absolutely shocking verdict.    But Trump was unanimously found guilty by a jury of citizens. The politicization of the American justice system is now omnipresent, even in trials with juries. 98 percent of trials in the US end with the defendant pleading guilty because the legal costs are simply too high. The whole system is corrupt.    But this affair will cost Trump a lot of votes, won't it? I don't think so. It could go the same way as Berlusconi. In any case, I will do everything I can to make sure he wins the election, because with him and without Biden, America will be greater again and the world will be a little safer.    How can you be so convinced of that? Just look at the record of Donald Trump's foreign policy: No war during his presidency, the outstanding Abraham Accords in the Middle East, and if it weren't for such a weak president in the White House who ordered that humiliating withdrawal from Afghanistan, I don't think Putin would have ever attacked Ukraine.    Do you really think Trump will be able to end the war in Ukraine "in 24 hours" as he keeps claiming? With regard to Ukraine, he could fail, I admit that. But at least he will try. That's Donald Trump's modus operandi: great promises and then he always finds a solution. He deserves the Nobel Peace Prize, but I think the elites will never give it to him. The West believes that Ukraine will win if we supply as many weapons as possible. But Russia will never give up. There is a danger of an endless war, like the one in Isonzo.    As a Brit, don't you fear that Trump could jeopardize Europe's security with his diatribes against NATO? Anyone who thinks that is a fool, a moron and an idiot! They have never really understood Trump. In fact, his statements on Nato are making the Atlantic alliance ever stronger. Donald said to me: "If all countries pay their dues, I will support NATO 100 percent. "  In cooperation with "La Repubblica". Translated from the Italian by B. Schneider  Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word. Original full page PDF Load-Date: June 20, 2024  End of Document
