   A 4th of July that Britain's Conservatives will want to forget: why Churchill's party is adrift CE Noticias Financieras English June 22, 2024 Saturday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1564 words Body   The latest scandal in which the British Conservatives are immersed, in the middle of the election campaign, is a metaphor for the drift of Winston Churchill's party. Craig Williams, the Prime Minister's private secretary for parliamentary affairs, and the Tories' campaign director, Tony Lee, and his wife Laura Saunders, the party's candidate, are under investigation for having bet on the date of the election, Thursday, July 4, which Prime Minister Rishi Sunak announced by surprise on May 22. Given that the defeat looks set to be historic, these privileged and well-informed people took the opportunity to win a few pounds. The anecdote illustrates well how far the party that has ruled the United Kingdom the longest in the last 250 years has sunk. This is something never seen, or even imagined, by those who knew these Tory MPs and ministers, renowned for their pragmatism and their love of good manners. More than at any other time in modern history, Britain has lost the respect of the world."  FRANCIS GHILÈS, SENIOR RESEARCH ASSOCIATE AT CIDOB   Rishi Sunak, who assumed power in October 2022 after the resignation of the short-lived Liz Truss, announced early elections on May 22. The image of Sunak, in the rain as he summoned Britons to the polls, was a bad omen. Sunak risks losing his seat for Richmond and Northallerton in North Yorkshire. Home Secretary James Cleverly and Finance Secretary Jeremy Hunt are also not safe.  14 years and five prime ministers  After 14 years in power and five prime ministers, the British Conservative Party will suffer a historic defeat, the biggest in a century, if the polls are correct. In the latest poll by Redfield & Wilton Strategies, Labour would obtain 42% of the votes, followed by Nigel Farage's Reform, with 19%, and with one point less, 18%, the Conservatives. Farage has stirred up the Tory and Labour leadership on Saturday with his barbs about how "the West provoked the war in Ukraine" with NATO's expansion into Eastern European countries. While the Conservatives err on the side of adopting Farage's radical ideology, his praise of Putin "as a political operator" is a red line. The Farage phenomenon, who announced he was contesting the election after denying it, is a symptom of how populism has taken root on British soil. The British electoral system means that the translation into seats is not so obvious, as there are as many battles as there are constituencies. In the projection made by Ipsos this week, the party led by Keir Starmer would reach 453 seats, while the Conservatives would sink to 115. If this forecast is confirmed, it would be the largest majority that any British government has had in the post-war period, with the Tories sinking to their worst result, according to SkyNews.  Worst government since the American Revolution The looming disaster prompted Edward Luce, US editor of the Financial Times, to write, "The Fourth of July is my second favorite holiday in America, after Thanksgiving. This year, however, I will be prepared to celebrate Independence Day with an un-English insouciance. Since it coincides with the British general election, that will be the day my countrymen will award the Order of the Boot to the least competent British government in my lifetime - in fact, the worst since Lord North screwed up the American Revolution." He is referring to the Revolution in the Thirteen Colonies between 1775 and 1783. For Luce, the Conservative government is "a multichannel mess." Agreeing with this view is Francis Ghiles, senior research associate at CIDOB, who paints a bleak picture in his article entitled UK prepares to give the boot to worst ever British government. "Trade and investment flows have shrunk. Promised trade deals with India and the United States have not followed Brexit. Workers from continental Europe have been replaced by far greater numbers of Asians and Africans. The dismal state of the National Health Service, the fact that there seem to be more food banks than McDonalds, broken railroads, rivers overflowing with sewage or growing child poverty tell the story of a country that has reverted to its status before Margaret Thatcher came to power in 1979, that of the sick man of Europe. More than at any other time in modern history, Britain has lost the respect of the world." Coventry, poverty and crime In cities like Coventry, with 320,000 inhabitants, the second largest in the West Midlands after Birmingham, the decadence to which Ghilès refers is evident. Dozens of people of limited means hang around the bus station. Poverty is evident in their clothing and poor hygiene. There is a large migrant community. "Before they came from the European Union, now there are more Asians and Africans," says Ibrahim, a finance student who is a driver in his spare time. Of Guinean origin but with a British passport, he assures that no leader convinces him. "There is no one really solid. Just asking about transport combinations makes it clear how the system has been dismantled. To go to Stratford-upon-Avon, Shakespeare's hometown, just 40 kilometers away, the combination of bus and train costs a minimum of 36 pounds (about 42 euros) round trip. Walking around the city, even in broad daylight, carries risks. It is the third most dangerous city in Europe. Among the top five are three in England: first, Bradford, third, Coventry, and fourth, Birmingham.  Austerity, corruption and Brexit For Ghilês, there are several reasons for the predicted collapse of the Conservative Party at the polls. "It is the party that has held power most of the time in the last 250 years and that was possible because of its pragmatism. It didn't have a very strong ideology. In 20 years it has changed. In 2010, after the international financial crisis, they have cut public services, healthcare, health.... Austerity has been a disaster for society in general, and especially for young people," says the researcher. He also argues that the recourse to referendums, especially the Brexit referendum called by David Cameron, now foreign minister, do not obey the British political tradition. "Cameron called the referendum because of internal divisions in the Conservative Party over the European Union. It has been a disaster for the United Kingdom. And from there the party is going further and further to the right. The British Tories were Trump before Trump."  Brexit, a disaster but irreversible The Office for Budget Responsibility, the government's official forecasting body, has predicted that Britain will suffer a 4% cut in potential productivity in connection with staying in the EU, and that UK import and export volumes will be 15% lower than they would have been in the absence of Brexit. 55% of citizens now say that the UK's decision to leave the EU was wrong; 31% believe it was right and the rest don't know, according to the latest polls on this issue. The political cost is enormous. It has been a bombshell that recent prime ministers have not been able to deal with. From David Cameron who made the mistake of accepting the consultation to the hapless Theresa May, the cynical Boris Johnson and the short-lived Liz Truss. Rishi Sunak has settled the Irish dispute, his latest concession to pragmatism. Joining the EU again I see as irreversible. But I see a renegotiation along the lines of Switzerland or Norway as possible".  ENRIQUE FEÁS, SENIOR RESEARCHER AT THE ROYAL ELCANO INSTITUTE  Even so, Brexit is irreversible. At least in a couple of generations. "Joining the EU I see as irreversible. But I see a renegotiation along the lines of Switzerland or Norway as possible. It would be a political humiliation to ask for membership again. Another issue would be a different status and they will sell it as a one-to-one relationship. In addition, the EU has its own problems," says Enrique Feás, senior researcher at the Elcano Royal Institute. According to Feás, in the Conservatives' drift "Brexit has been an important element. But it is still just another failed promise. Their management of the pandemic has been disappointing, their leaders are disappointing and the country has lost international weight, largely because of Brexit". To Enrique Feás, it seems to him that the Tories have been badly hurt by their handling of immigration. "The idea of taking refugees on standby to Rwanda generates rejection, especially among young people. And then they say that if the European Court of Human Rights criticizes it they abandon it. They give the image of a pariah, not of international leadership." Now that we look at France with giddiness at the possible arrival at the Palace of Matignon of a radical right-wing prime minister, from National Rally, Marine Le Pen's party, we must recognize that in the United Kingdom they have already gone through a national-populist or extreme right-wing government. To their extremist drift, due to the influence of the most radical Tories to whom Boris Johnson bowed to become Prime Minister, we must add scandals such as Partygate, which portray a ruling class that believed itself to be above the law, when the population was suffering from the Covid pandemic. For Francis Ghilès, "this is a fundamental moment in the history of the United Kingdom. What is happening now is a social failure. They have left the country much poorer than when they arrived in 2010. The dream of imperial Britain has totally failed".  Load-Date: June 23, 2024  End of Document
