   After all the trash talk about border issue, the Tories know our fates are intertwined Irish Independent May 4, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 30 Length: 986 words Byline: RICHARD CURRAN Body   You could be forgiven for thinking relations between the Irish and British governments had hit some kind of new low this week. Think again and remind yourself of what it was like during the Troubles or the middle-Brexit negotiations. A public spat about migrants fleeing the UK to come over the Border to Dublin triggered a bizarre round of political trash talk. Meetings were cancelled. British prime minister Rishi Sunak appeared almost to sneer at the problems we are having with accommodating migrant numbers. At home, Micheál Martin had a pop at the Daily Mail and Telegraph, while more or less telling Sunak his party would get hammered in the local elections. Which it did. Boris Johnson's former Brexit negotiator David Frost summed it up in an article he wrote for The Telegraph, under the headline "There's a trap for Britain in Ireland's Brexit hypocrisy". "Tempting as it is to laugh at the Republic's migrant discomfort, we should want a meaningful land border," it said. It all needs to be put in context. We have made a hash of our housing policies which in turn has resulted in a hash of our migration policy. In the UK, the Tory government is in its final months having made a hash of almost everything since about 2016. Undoubtedly, the trash talk shows a real sensitivity among many Tories about losing the argument in relation to the Border during the Brexit negotiations. If Irish politicians are going to lead with their chin, by parroting unsubstantiated migration figures for their own purposes, then a section of the Tory party will be more than happy to exploit it. The British government was shocked with how things turned out in the post-Brexit border negotiations. With the backing of Brussels, the Irish government secured most of what it sought on the open border complications which arose from a surprise Brexit poll outcome it didn't want. The British government's miscalculation that Germany, France and others would dump little Ireland shaped much of London's poor strategy in the talks. We had to put up with then trade secretary Liz Truss joking to an American business audience that cross-border trade in Ireland consisted of lorry-loads of turnips. The British had to stomach Leo Varadkar roaming around an EU leaders' meeting with an old newspaper clipping about an IRA attack on a border customs post. When Tony Blair addressed the Dáil in 1998, then cathaoirleach Séamus Pattison summed up the post-Troubles Irish/British relationship by describing it as a "maturing" one. From an economic, social, cultural and political point of view, our relationship with the UK is both entangled and entwined, depending on how you look at it. Once you got past the nausea induced by the headline and the first few paragraphs of David Frost's Telegraph article on Thursday, a more measured tone crept in, when he wrote about this week's migration issue. "So, even if it goes against the grain, the correct course of action is to let the Irish do what they want, noting that this is entirely achievable without fences and border posts… Like it or not, the United Kingdom and Ireland are deeply entwined as countries and as people for a whole raft of historical and political reasons," he wrote. Ireland's relationship with the UK is evolving and maturing but it has changed dramatically since the days of the Troubles. Economically, we have become a lot less dependent on the British market for our exports. The US remains our biggest export market in value terms. There are as many people employed by Irish firms in the US as there are employed by American multinationals here. Irish exporting companies have shifted some of their focus from the UK to continental Europe. This process accelerated in the years after the Brexit referendum and we now have better direct supply connectivity with places like France and Spain than before Brexit. Bizarrely, Brexit has prompted Irish exporting firms to find more customers in Germany, France or Scandinavia, while not actually losing as many British customers as they had feared. When it comes to food exports, like beef and drinks, the British market remains very important. Ireland is the third biggest export market for the UK, which underlines the folly of putting up new trade barriers as part of Brexit. According to UK trade figures, at the end of last year British companies had invested £70.2bn in Irish ventures, while £36.8bn had gone in the other direction. Despite dire warnings about the possible impact of Brexit, the UK imported £32bn of goods and services from Ireland last year, an increase of 13pc. However, when you strip out the higher price of goods through inflation, a clear pattern of UK loss appears as a result of Brexit. In the 12 months to February this year, British goods exported to Ireland fell by nearly 12pc in constant prices. Britain is still our biggest tourist market in terms of numbers of visitors. What happens to the British economy and people's standard of living there doesn't impact Ireland as much as it used to, but it still matters a lot more than the implications of our fortunes for the British economy. The connections remain important. The Common Travel Area, the fact that anyone born in Northern Ireland may choose Irish citizenship, the British air force protection of seas and airspace off our shores - these are all unusual aspects of that ongoing relationship. Trash talk about the Border migrant issue doesn't set the dial back as much as we might think. The current government in London is in its final death throes. From Boris, to Liz and now Rishi, they have been as slippery as an eel dipped in baby oil. A new Labour government approaches. They might be less slippery, but we can't rely on Labour leader Keir Starmer to solve our immigrant accommodation crisis. "Like it or not, the United Kingdom and Ireland are deeply entwined as countries and as people for a whole raft of historical and political reasons" Load-Date: May 4, 2024  End of Document
