   BCC calls for urgent upgrade of trading ties with Brussels; Brexit concerns Financial Times (London, England) May 30, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 386 words Byline: MICHAEL O'DWYER ; PETER FOSTER Body   The next government must negotiate an improved trading relationship with the EU as businesses face ever-higher costs from Brexit, one of the country's biggest corporate lobby groups has warned. The British Chambers of Commerce said that tighter migration rules and rising costs and complexity of exports were throttling investment and growth at home. "We urgently need to get a better trading relationship with our closest neighbour," said BCC director-general Shevaun Haviland. A constant addition of new EU rules was making life ever-harder for exporters and their suppliers, she said. "We thought that after year one things would just get easier for people as they worked out what the problems were, but actually the changes just kept coming." The concerns are part of a rising chorus of criticism about the impact of Brexit on businesses ahead of the general election on July 4. Both Labour and the Conservatives have avoided focusing on Brexit, which is still seen as divisive among voters. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer, whose party has a significant lead in opinion polls, is set to pursue closer trade and defence ties with the EU if he becomes prime minister. Starmer wants to "deepen" the UK's relationship with the bloc but will rule out rejoining the single market or allowing freedom of movement between Britain and EU, senior Labour figures told the FT last month. Most companies exporting to the EU told the BCC that selling into the bloc had become harder during 2023, with new border checks on plant and animal products also imposing punitive new costs, particularly on small companies. Haviland said that easing migration rules was one of the changes that would most help business. "Working with the EU to ensure that the movement of people for work is easier will absolutely benefit our businesses." The UK voted to leave the EU in 2016 and officially exited in 2021, when the EU UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement came into force. The BCC's comments echo concerns from business grandees. Sir Mike Rake, former chair of BT Group, KPMG and easyJet, said Brexit had been "the single biggest act of economic and reputational self-harm in our modern history, compounded by an ideologically driven exit treaty which continues to damage our economy with increasing and unnecessary frictional trade and regulatory costs". Load-Date: May 29, 2024  End of Document
