   Beyond Brexit, the Tories leave a grim legacy after 14 years in power CE Noticias Financieras English June 30, 2024 Sunday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 976 words Body   Brexit. Brexit. Brexit. It was the word that defined the last UK elections in 2019. After years of paralysis and chaos in Westminster in the face of a divorce that the Tories themselves were incapable of managing, the British granted a victory not seen since the times of Margaret Thatcher to an outlandish Boris Johnson with his promise voted three years earlier in the historic referendum. Key to winning an absolute majority was the support received by the Red Wall districts of northern England which, for the first time since World War II, abandoned Labour. However, now, ahead of the July 4 polls, Brexit has become a taboo word. In the case of the ranks of Keir Starmer, who counts in the polls, it is understandable. For the Labour leader, it is not the time to boast of pro-European ideology, since the lost votes must be recovered and with any word in favor of Brussels he could be accused of being a traitor. But the silence of the Tories in the face of a term that until recently dominated their dictionary is surprising given that it is their greatest legacy after fourteen years in power. With all the polls predicting the end of an era, it is time to take stock of a party that has been in Downing Street for more than a decade on three occasions since World War II. In the 1950s, they transformed an ailing and bombed-out Empire into a prosperous country. In the 1980s, under the Iron Lady, they reduced the size of the state and reshaped the economy. But this latest phase - where they have had - the inheritance is bleaker. Tory Danny Kruger himself, head of the New Conservative group elected on the Red Wall last election, laments that they leave the country "sadder, less united and less conservative." Although Brexit was what many Tories had longed for for decades, it ended up tearing the formation apart and it was Nigel Farage, who became the real protagonist. Euroskeptics sold the divorce as the answer to all the country's problems. Leaving the EU would transform the UK's economic prospects by making Britons richer, end EU bureaucracy, free up money to spend on public health and restore border control. But nothing could be further from the truth. It is true that the UK did not fall into recession. Yet the new trade deals struck with other countries hardly represent a benefit to GDP, which, according to analysis by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, is between 2% and 3% lower than it would have been if the UK had not left the EU; the equivalent of a loss of £850 per person rising to £2,300 per capita by 2035. For its part, immigration, far from falling, has reached record numbers - both legal and illegal. And, despite this, the British labor market suffers a significant labor shortage due to the loss of workers from the bloc, which it has not been able to compensate with those who have arrived from other parts of the world. But Brexit is not the only issue with which the Conservatives are deeply at odds. The government has halved the UK's carbon emissions, making it a world leader in green policy and technology. Theresa May will go down in history as the prime minister forced to resign after her own ranks rejected -- the divorce deal she reached with Brussels. However, before leaving Downing Street, she announced that the UK would become the world's first major economy to enshrine in law a target of net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. This legislation, which at the time went unnoticed, is widely regarded as the most important legacy of 14 years of Conservative rule. But, rather than boasting about it, the hard wing sector fails to link it to the principles of a party led at the time by David Cameron, who, at 43, became . He took office in 2010 in the wake of the financial crisis with the promise of restoring growth, but the period since then has presented a dismal performance compared to before the crisis. Overall GDP would have risen twice as much had it maintained its pre-crisis trend, and average incomes, adjusted for inflation, have barely moved since 2009, the last full year of the Labor government. Dame DeAnne Julius, a distinguished fellow at think tank Chatham House and former Bank of England policymaker, warns that the inheritance for Keir Starmer's next Labour government may prove even tougher than the one Cameron received. "Our constraints are worse now, tighter than they were in 2010," he said. Among the reasons are a frozen planning system and associated housing crisis, weak investment, skills shortages and higher levels of public debt, which is forecast to reach 90% of GDP in the current fiscal year, up from 70% when the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition came to power fourteen years ago. It would be unfair not to take into account the Covid-19 pandemic and the ongoing war in Ukraine. To be fair to the Conservatives they have not done everything wrong. Education has been radically reformed with standards now higher on several metrics including Pisa scores. Crime has also fallen dramatically. Likewise, the Tories have demonstrated their chameleon-like ability to transform with each leader. David Cameron's party has nothing to do with Theresa May's party. Let alone that of Boris Johnson or the fleeting Liz Truss (). And then with Rishi Sunak, the first tenant of Downing Street of Indian origin and Hindu religion. All in all, as Wayne Hunt, analyst of The Spectator, bible for the Tories, assured, the sensation they leave is of "having lacked a central vision or mission" having gone through "several changes of direction, shaken by their internal factions and by the attraction of electoral trends". "From austerity to Brexit, the party has failed to find or articulate an overarching vision for what it does, making its passage through power seem more like a series of half-managed problems than a well-executed plan," he qualifies.  Load-Date: July 1, 2024  End of Document
