   Brexit hurt culture, not just economy The Western Mail June 29, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 24,25 Length: 428 words Body   REGARDING your letters column of June 26, the comments by the Joint Chairs, Wales for Europe, namely Padraig O'Brien and Dr Charles Smith, strike a number of very salient points regarding growth especially in respect of a nation which decided to "cut of f its trade arrangements with its nearest neighbours who happen to belong to the world's largest single market". The figures quoted by the Office for Budget Responsibility and other neutral bodies have indicated a 15% decline in Britain's international trade and an annual loss to its growth rate of 4% to 6%. All these and other evidence point to the fact Brexit has been a disaster as is now acknowledged by many industrial leaders and more responsible politicians. One reads almost daily of small businesses and traders who highlight the difficulties of trading with EU countries which constitute our largest and closest customer base. We know that all the main political parties appear reluctant to discuss these matters and to acknowledge failure of Brexit in economic terms, indicating that it has not been implemented properly. However my main concern lies more with the human and cultural implications of the break with Europe. I worked in the cultural field and my wife was a languages teacher with long-standing links with European countries through school exchanges and other educational contacts which led to family friendships which remain to this day. Our European friends could not understand the rationale of the British politicians who so brazenly flouted the truth in persuading their electorate to leave the EU. Immediately after the Brexit result my wife and I undertook a cruise of the Baltic countries using the local ferry service and were very aware of the two queues when disembarking from the ship, namely EU and the Others which was a much longer and slower line. I recall telling my wife: next year we shall be amongst the Others. Apart from the obvious travel advantages of membership of the EU we know of the difficulties faced by travelling orchestras and individual musicians and the long established links with universities and specialist colleges - all now have to be renegotiated with far more bureaucracy and costs involved. I make these points in order to emphasise the importance of the cultural and human links which had developed within our membership of the EU and which are now rendered more difficult if not imperilled, whilst our politicians remain - silent regarding the whole failure of Brexit and the impact on all our lives both economic and cultural. David Lewis Carmarthen Load-Date: June 29, 2024  End of Document
