   Brexit is blamed for £6bn fall in retail sales to the EU The Daily Telegraph (London) June 3, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 19 Length: 374 words Byline: Hannah Boland Body   BRITISH retailers have suffered a £6bn slump in sales to the EU since Brexit as border red tape strangles demand for UK fashion. Exports to the EU of non-food products have plunged by almost a fifth from 2019 levels, according to data from Retail Economics. Last year, £27.6bn of UK non-food items were sold in the EU compared with £33.6bn in 2019. The drop was most pronounced in clothing and footwear, where exports tumbled from £7.4bn in 2019 to £2.7bn in 2023. Richard Lim, chief executive of Retail Economics, said: "The profound shift in the UK's trade relationship with the EU has hit British brands and retailers hard. "Successive waves of disruption caused by Brexit and the pandemic have significantly disadvantaged UK exporters who are having to navigate increased friction and cost." However, the Retail Economics figures suggest EU companies had not experienced a similar slump in sales to the UK, which had imported non-food products from the EU "at a broadly similar rate" since 2019. It will fuel concerns that UK firms are being harder hit by Brexit red tape, despite Government pledges to eliminate bureaucracy. Retailers have faced increased hurdles when shipping to the EU since early 2021. Items valued at more than £135 are subject to customs duties. Retailers have also warned that EU customers are being dissuaded from buying British good by shipping delays. Between 2021 and 2022, dwell times at UK ports more than doubled. The British Footwear Association has warned of "dramatically reduced demand" for UK brands, as EU import duties and taxes are in some cases forcing them to charge up to 30pc more, compared with local brands. Marks and Spencer closed 11 of its French stores in late 2021, blaming supply complexities in shipping fresh and chilled produce into the country. The EU introduced checks on meat and dairy products the day after Brexit, but the UK did not reciprocate to avoid chaos at the www.ports.UK checks on EU produce have been delayed many times. Retail Economics said higher shipping costs, extra delays and the need for businesses to register an EU entity to trade in the bloc were too much for fashion firms whose market was "characterised by tight profit margins and the need to respond rapidly to trends". Load-Date: June 3, 2024  End of Document
