   Brexit exposed a 'Westminster knows best' union, says John Swinney The National (Scotland) June 24, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 763 words Byline: Steph Brawn Body   JOHN Swinney has accused the Westminster establishment of having a -know your place- attitude towards Scotland as he ripped into Unionist parties for not acknowledging the devastating impacts of Brexit during the election campaign. In a speech at Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen exactly eight years on from the Brexit referendum result, the First Minister said the implementation of the UK-s departure from the EU exposed the UK as -not a partnership of equal nations- and instead a -Westminster knows best- union. He insisted Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer were -reinforcing- this -every single day of this campaign-, adding that Scotland-s voice was still being ignored. -The result of the Brexit referendum and its fall-out wasn-t just about our relationship with Europe, it has told us something fundamental about the United Kingdom too,- said Swinney. -It demonstrated that the UK is not a partnership of equal nations. The fact that Scotland voted to remain mattered not one jot to Westminster. READ MORE: John Swinney hits out after Keir Starmer 'gender ideology' comments -That-s not equality - it-s a -know your place- attitude. And the way Scotland is being treated over Brexit is symptomatic of a wider -Westminster knows best- union, whatever the cost to Scotland. -Scotland-s voice is still being ignored and our democratic choices are still disrespected. We see Westminster politicians take trips north of the Border to sneer at the very idea Scotland can have a real, genuine influence at Westminster. -That is the reality of his unequal union." The First Minister accused Labour and the Tories of a -conspiracy of silence- on Brexit as he reeled off how the economy, NHS and education had been negatively impacted. He spoke of how the National Institute for Economic and Social Research had found the UK economy is already 2.5% smaller than it would have been if it had stayed in the EU, meaning around 69 billion had been wiped from the economy. For Scotland, Swinney said this meant a 2.3bn loss in public revenue. Keir Starmer is offering 'no real change' when it comes to Brexit, John Swinney said He also spoke about how the loss of freedom of movement was making it harder to recruit staff for care homes and how Brexit was causing problems for Scottish industries, citing estimations that red tape had cost Scottish salmon producers up to 100m. When speaking about education, Swinney said the UK had committed an act of -educational and cultural vandalism- by pulling out of the Erasmus+ scheme. He said: -Through Erasmus+, students, staff and young people from EU countries get to experience other cultures and life abroad, improve their language and soft skills, improve their career opportunities and enhance their personal development. READ MORE: Obsession': Scottish Tory manifesto says SNP more than once per page -It-s an opportunity no longer available to Scotland-s young people because the Westminster parties are determined to continue with Brexit - whatever the cost. That is shameful.- He insisted Scotland could benefit significantly from becoming independent and rejoining the EU, which would allow the country once again to be part of the single market and have access to EU trade deals. Swinney added: -We would have protection for the rights and interests of workers and their families - free from the threat of any future right wing Westminster government. -Our businesses would have the ability to attract and retain people from across the EU to remain competitive. -We would be in partnership to combat crime with access again to the European Arrest Warrant. -EU membership would mean that artists and creative professionals could move freely between Scotland and the rest of the EU, without barriers like visa and customs requirements.- Swinney insisted Scotland would also make an -important contribution- to the EU, helping to contribute to energy security and assisting the EU with reaching net zero goals because of its enormous renewable potential. The First Minister concluded his speech by saying he believed Scotland being independent and back in the EU would actually improve the country-s relationship with the rest of the UK. He said: -Scotland could act as a bridge between the rest of the UK and the European Union. -If a future UK government wanted a closer relationship with the EU we would be a strong supporter and a source of help. -Since the Brexit referendum, Westminster has frequently over-ridden the wishes of the Scottish Parliament in devolved policy areas. -We could replace that trend with a genuine partnership based on equality.- Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
