   Brexit: Addressing the elephant in the room; THE NOTE BOOK Where the City's movers and shakers have their say. Today, it's James Chapman, director of Soho Communications City A.M. May 7, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 City A.M. All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; OPINION, COLUMN; Pg. 7 Length: 323 words Byline: James Chapman Body   MY OLD boss George Osborne (who was against a referendum) recently said of Brexit: "Something happened to my country which I still to this day think was a profound mistake for Britain and its future. I look back on this really with horror." Whatever your view of the former Chancellor, this is a more honest assessment of our departure from the EU than that of any current frontline politician. The Conservatives are entirely lashed to the Brexit mast, doomed to go down with the ship as more and more voters conclude the whole project has been a disastrous folly. This means they must constantly declare that black is white and scrabble around for nonexistent Brexit 'benefits'. Take business secretary Kemi Badenoch, who last week tried to claim the latest trade figures somehow vindicated the Brexit experiment. Cursory examination of her data revealed that export volumes are not, in fact, bigger than ever before and only appeared so because she had failed to adjust for inflation. Goods exports are actually well below their pre-Brexit levels, just as 'Project Fear' warned. Meanwhile, after years of delay, expensive new post-Brexit border checks came into force - final confirmation, if it were needed, that all the promises of 'frictionless trade' on the same terms as before were false. Within 24 hours the new computer system for imports had collapsed and food and plants coming in from the EU were being waved through with incorrect paperwork to avoid the humiliating sight of massive queues of lorries. According to recent analysis by City Hall, as a result of Brexit the average Londoner was nearly £3,400 worse off. With polls showing that over 60 per cent of voters would now choose to rejoin the EU, the omerta from our main political parties will not last forever. It's already clear that the 2016 referendum is going to be as unsuccessful as the 1975 one in settling the question of our relationship with our nearest neighbours. Load-Date: May 7, 2024  End of Document
