   Brexit and economy at forefront of debate as candidates are quizzed The Courier June 27, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 16 Length: 449 words Byline: ALASDAIR CLARK Body   Westminster hopefuls for the Dundee Central constituency faced a 200-strong audience yesterday, with the candidates grilled on issues spanning the local economy, dementia care, Brexit and integrity in politics. All four main parties were represented at the hustings which was organised jointly by Dundee University and The Courier. Chaired by political editor Alasdair Clark, the audience were able to put questions to the prospective MPs on national and international issues; local matters in Dundee, and higher education specifically. On the international front, the first question of the night focused on Brexit, with one audience member pointing out Scotland had voted overwhelmingly to remain a member of the EU. SNP incumbent Chris Law made a passionate case for rejoining the EU, saying the route to do so would be as an independent nation. He told the audience: "Scotland voted to remain. Brexit has been an unmitigated disaster. "We were told if we voted no to independence we'd be guaranteed to have a place in the EU - that's turned out to be completely wrong." Liberal Democrat candidate Daniel Coleman said that while he campaigned passionately to remain, he did not think it was "realistic" for the next parliament to rejoin the EU. He added: "I think the Brexit we received did not have to be the way it was. There was chances to have a closer and more cooperative relationship with the European Union. "I have to say, though, it's not a great idea to go over old constitutional matters. If the Liberal Democrats won over 50% of the vote then perhaps yes, but any party winning over that is quite unlikely." On political integrity, all candidates confirmed they had not placed a bet on a political race with the benefit of insider knowledge. It comes as several Conservatives candidates across the UK are being investigated by the Gambling Commission over bets placed on the date of the election. Conservative candidate Emma Farquhar said: "I haven't bet on the election. Anyone who has who is shown to have insider knowledge, that needs to be investigated." Candidates were also quizzed on what they would like to see the next UK Government do to support the local economy in Dundee and boost tourism. Labour hopeful Richard McCready told the audience that the people of Dundee would need to see the benefits of the improved waterfront, or it risk becoming an "abject failure". "It needs to bring jobs and prosperity to Dundee. I welcome the Eden Project, I hope that comes to fruition before too long but I would also say I hope we scrap plans to close the Mills Observatory, Caird Park Golf Course and Broughty Castle. "There's no point closing the amenities we've got and coming up with new things." Graphic    TALKING POINTS: From left, Lib Dem Daniel Coleman, Conservative Emma Farquhar, Chris Law of the SNP, and Load-Date: June 27, 2024  End of Document
