   Brexit has reduced British to tears, says French PM thetimes.co.uk May 30, 2024 Thursday 3:25 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 589 words Byline: Charles Bremner | Adam Sage, Paris Highlight: Gabriel Attal tries to drum up support for President Macron’s centrist camp before next month’s European elections Body   Brexit has reduced Britain to tears, France’s prime minister has said as he campaigned against French populists he said wanted to follow the UK out of the European Union. “Don’t let’s be [like] the British, who cried after Brexit,” said Gabriel Attal in a radio interview designed to drum up support for President Macron’s centrist camp before next month’s European elections. Attal, 35, was speaking with Macron’s list on about 16 per cent in polls, way behind that of the populist right National Rally, on about 32 per cent. The prime minister is said to believe that he can dent the popularity of Jordan Bardella, 28, who is  heading the National Rally’s election campaign , by suggesting that he wants to emulate Britain by quitting the EU. The rally used to be officially in favour of “Frexit”, but Marine Le Pen, 55, its figurehead, has dropped the policy in the wake of  Brexit , which is viewed by most French voters as a mistake. Attal sought to suggest that the right-wing party nevertheless remained secretly bent on following the British example. “Because the reality is that their programme, at a European level, would mean France leaving Europe,” he said. He also warned of “very dangerous” consequences if the rally won a big number of seats in the European parliament. He said its MEPs would block EU institutions and weaken  France . “Will we be stronger by shutting ourselves away? We will not be stronger by being more alone.” His intervention came in the wake of a survey by Fondapol, a liberal Paris think tank, which found strong support for the EU among its 27-members, including among voters who are expected to flock to right-wing populist parties in next month’s elections. This has been driven by the deterrent effect of Britain’s perceived error and a desire for protection after the financial crisis, the pandemic, illegal immigration and the new geopolitical threat from Russia and China, the survey showed. Dominique Reynié, the director of Fondapol, said Brexit had been a disaster for Britain that had helped to end support among anti-system voters and their parties for leaving the bloc. Only 13 per cent of Europeans want their country to exit the EU, a figure that compares with polls a decade ago showing well over 20 per cent support for withdrawal.  “What a failure for the Brexiteers … For the populists, Brexit was a victory for nothing. This sovereignty through separation had thus only a tragic destiny,” Reynié told Le Figaro newspaper. The most remarkable feature of the European landscape is the swing towards the EU among the populist right-wing parties that are expected to enjoy a surge in next month’s election, Fondapol said. “Perhaps more than ever, most of the 360 million voters are undoubtedly committed to the values of democracy and the European idea,” it said. Europe is witnessing strong support for the union and the euro at the same time as an expanding populist vote, Reynié said. “The simultaneous appearance of these two movements implies that populist voters largely favour Europe and the euro, leading populist leaders to change their stance or lose their voters,” he said. The poll found that 68 per cent of Britons believed that the UK should return to the bloc and 28 per cent thought the country was better off outside the EU, down from 33 per cent in 2021. Asked if they want the British back, 77 per cent of Europeans said yes, with the Estonians most enthusiastic at 91 per cent and Luxembourgers the least keen at 66 per cent. The French were among the least supportive, at 70 per cent. Load-Date: May 30, 2024  End of Document
