   Brexit has failed - time to rejoin EU; Letters East Anglian Daily Times May 14, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 30 Length: 390 words Body   Three recent media reports should force us all to wake up and smell the coffee given the dire picture it paints. Firstly we hear that our existing water quality regulations and standards are not being applied or adhered to. We signed up to the 'water framework directive' as a member of the European Union and the framework, incorporated in our law, remains in place. Under the framework our rivers are supposed to all reach a "good" ecological standard by 2027. And yet last time they were all measured only 14pc reached this standard. Obviously we will fail to meet that target, by some distance. We were told during and after the Brexit Referendum that our standards would be maintained or improved. Clearly that wasn't true as the many stories on the atrocious state of our rivers in the media shows. Even the former environment secretary, Therese Coffey, whose responsibility this was, must acknowledge these stories show that she must have been asleep at the wheel. Secondly pharmacists have told us that drug shortages are 'beyond critical' and cite Brexit and the difficulties presented by the inability to benefit from the internal market as one of the reasons for these shortages. Nearly 80pc of pharmacists have stated that these shortages are putting patients health at risk with hundreds of drugs being difficult or impossible to find. Finally farming, a key economic sector in Suffolk, is in crisis. The sector has seen 'a collapse in confidence' with many considering leaving farming. Again one of the reasons cited for their difficulties are the changes presented by Brexit. This includes access to the internal market, vet shortages (because our European vets are going home and can't be replaced) and the Government failing to replace the EU basic payment which supports farmers. In each of these three areas we were told that Brexit would have no impact on our standards, supply and economic support. Indeed we were told that the 'freedom' leaving the EU gave us would mean these could be improved and increased. Beyond critical sounds like a good description of the situation for all three. Eight years after the Referendum we are in a far worse situation than we were in 2016. Is it time to acknowledge that Brexit is an experiment that has clearly and abjectly failed and start the process of rejoining the EU? JOHN DELL, Shotley Load-Date: May 14, 2024  End of Document
