   British Labour prepares to win by a landslide in the election and wants to get closer to Europe: Does Brexit unravel? CE Noticias Financieras English June 24, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1460 words Body   A British Labour triumph not seen in 100 years. Labour leads the Conservatives by around 20 points in the sum of the Financial Times national polls of voting intentions. These figures suggest that the UK's main opposition party is on track to win a large majority in the July 4 general election. Even incumbent Prime Minister Rishi Sunak would not be able to renew his seat. If the polls are correct, Labour could win around 450 seats out of 650 seats in the House of Commons. A success not even Labour's Tony Blair had in 1997, with his spectacular triumph in "cool Britannia". But these are other times in another Britain, divorced from Europe and suffering economically for it, with a discredited government obsessed with migrants and Volodimir Zelenski's main ally in the war in Ukraine. If Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour human rights lawyer and former crown attorney, wins, will the kingdom return to the European Union? The majority of the British people regret the Brexit and its results. Their economy, their exports, their financial dynamics are suffering. The "red wall" of the North of Great Britain, historically Labour but who voted for Tory Boris Johnson because they were in favor of Brexit, are the first to be disillusioned by his election. They will return to vote massively for Labour. Millions of voters for new Labour leader Keir Starmer believe he will undo Brexit, despite Labour's official plan to embrace life outside the European Union. Brexit is something of a banned word in the Labour campaign. Starmer, a pro-European in the Brexit referendum, has spent years trying to break with his pro-European past and his desire to remain in the EU. He insists on his promises not to support free movement in the EU and explicitly rules out any return to the single market or customs union. At least during the campaign. Voters believe them to be "pro Brexit." But despite consistent messaging over the past four years, a new poll conducted for the site Politico suggests that many voters simply "haven't got the message." The research, conducted by pollsters from think tank More in Common, found that only 18 percent of voters are aware of Starmer's actual position on EU-U.K. relations. His formula is complex: encourage a closer relationship with the European bloc but outside its single market and customs union. Starmer and his team had long considered abandoning Labour's support for the EU. They saw it as imperative to winning the next general election. But there are already early signs that after the election, a Starmer government would be expected to deliver for those who want a closer relationship with the EU. Conservative Prime Minister Rishi Sunak could be out of Parliament. AP Photo The pressures will not just come from outside the party structures. In a recent interview, London Mayor Sadiq Khan broke ranks to call for a relaxation of EU immigration rules for young people. He said he would "make that case" to his party leader if Sir Keir Starmer became prime minister. "One of the points I will be making to the new Labour government is how the skills and labor shortage is affecting our economy," Khan said. He argued that a new agreement on youth visas would bring both economic and cultural advantages to the UK. Under the plan, people in the U.K. between the ages of 18 and 30 would be entitled to move to the EU (and vice versa) for up to four years for any purpose. He also called for an end to what he called an "oath of silence" on Brexit. Starmer's team has also resisted calls to rejoin the EU's Erasmus university exchange program, another Brexit casualty and a watchword of remain supporters. But it is unclear how long that position and others like it can be maintained. Different models A deal as with Norway? Rejoin?What are Labour's options for forging closer ties with Europe? Starmer and Reeves plan to improve parts of the relationship with the EU. But what about becoming a member of the single market, or even returning to full membership? The main problem is that faced with the taboo of reversing Brexit, Labour is leaning towards Cherry Picking, which the EU fervently opposes. Labour's plans to re-engage with Brussels, after eight tumultuous and often bitter years since the referendum, will be welcomed by all those who have recognized Brexit as an act of self-destruction. Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves have put forward tentative proposals, which address discrete issues in the UK's relationship with the EU. Labor says it will seek to negotiate a "deal to avoid unnecessary border controls." That delays exports and retains everything at the border. The deal "could lead to a 22.5% increase in agri-food exports and a 5.6% increase in imports," concluded a group of specialists at the University of Bristol. Conservative Premier Rishi Sunak and Labour leader Keir Starmer. AFP Photo Reeves said he wants to talk to the EU about a "bespoke" agreement, for the chemical industry to try to avoid the costs associated with registering products under a UK system. A mutual recognition agreement for professional qualifications would "help open up markets for UK service exporters," the Labour manifesto says. This would help professionals with UK qualifications to work in the EU. "But without the free movement of labor that comes from being within the EU single market, there is little to gain," said Anand Menon, director of UK in a Changing Europe. "Without free movement, professionals or anyone else will continue to find it difficult to move for work between the UK and the EU," he said. Nothing without free movement The European Union will reject a future Labour government's Brexit plan unless it agrees to return to free movement of goods and people, the bloc's former negotiator warned. France's Michel Barnier insisted that Brussels would maintain a block on attempts to "cherry-pick" its single markets without signing up to corresponding obligations, in an interview with The Telegraph. His intervention will deal a blow to Sir Keir Starmer's plans to ease trade restrictions only by revising Boris Johnson's Brexit deal.That restrictive scheme is not enough for the EU. Despite wanting to build closer ties with Brussels,Starmer insisted that Labour would not rejoin the single market or customs union or subscribe to freedom of movement.Without them, the Brexit will continue intact. Barnier, who negotiated Britain's separation from the EU and the future trade deal, told The Telegraph that the bloc would "welcome further talks. But it would not soften its previous red lines." "It's one thing to say we can review the UK-EU relationship and, in the same spirit, we can improve the relationship," he said. "But it's another thing to say we can open up the single market. Any UK government - the current one or the future one - knows the rules of the single market. You can't get in and out at the same time." "If we are talking about the chemical sector, we are talking about a kind of selective selection. No way," Barnier said, in a direct swipe at Labor's plans. However, he said a future Labour government could sign up to a range of new EU deals, if it was willing to align itself with the bloc's rules in those areas. "I can talk about defense, foreign policy, cooperation in Africa, financial services," Barnier said . "There are many sectors where we can complete trade deals and open new negotiations between the UK and the EU. The main ones are obviously related to the current situation in Ukraine and Europe with the war, the risk of terrorism.... I think we should do it, it is in our common interest to open a new negotiation." Barnier was more open about the prospect of a deal to reduce controls on British food exports. "I think there is a positive room for maneuver to complete a trade agreement , with a specific veterinary agreement, to facilitate flows and exchanges in the animal and vegetable sector," he said. He also highlighted what could become a major challenge for a future Labour government, when negotiations on access for European fishermen to British waters by 2026 and beyond will need to be held. "Don't forget that we have included in the Brexit trade deal the parallel negotiation of the deal, for the UK to access the EU electricity market in 2026," he said. "We have clearly put these two points in parallel: fisheries on the one side, with this new negotiation for reciprocal access to British and European waters, and access for British industry to the European electricity market. This point has been very clear from day one," he said. "I recommend both sides to be reasonable at the start of this negotiation," he suggested. Until after July 4, no Labour leader will be precise about the future of Brexit. Negotiations will be a next chapter because the kingdom needs it. PB Load-Date: June 25, 2024  End of Document
