   Britain is broken and Farage broke it i-news June 19, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 19 Length: 840 words Byline: Emily Maitlis Body   Almost exactly eight years on from the Brexit vote, there's a man in Wales who hasn't got a good word to say about it. A man who believed we'd now have net-zero migration, thriving small businesses, less red tape and more national control. He is, he will tell you, genuinely disappointed. That man, it might surprise you to know, is Nigel Farage. Yup, Nigel is back - telling the crowd at his manifesto launch, in the Welsh valleys of Merthyr Tydfil, that he shares their grievance with what has happened. Of course he does. He's always there to share your grievance. Even if he's caused it in the first place. Nigel Farage emoting about the pain that Brexit has caused this country would be hilarious - if it wasn't so deeply, deeply insulting. The snake oil peddler of Brexit now hates Brexit. Last week on BBC Question Time the audience was asked to raise their hands if they had experienced "benefits from Brexit". Only one hand went up. I'm not pretending that's pure science. Maybe a different audience, or a different wording, or a different atmosphere in the room would have elicited a different response. But maybe not. What is obvious, eight years on, is how few people have anything positive to say about Brexit. A YouGov poll in May 2023 recorded the highest levels of "Bregret" among Leave voters to date. Sixty-two per cent of Britons described Brexit as "more of a failure"; a mere nine per cent considered it "more of a success". There's your one bloke in the room with his hand up. And this is borne out by what the Office for Budget Responsibility tells us has happened - in real terms - to the economy. The watchdog forecast just last month that the post-Brexit trading relationship between the UK and Europe would reduce long-run productivity by 4 per cent relative to the EU, and that exports and imports will be around 15 per cent lower than if the UK had stayed in. It forecast that new trade deals with non-EU countries will have no material impact. And it has shifted its assumption that post-Brexit migration would reduce to around 130,000 a year medium term and now recognises it will be around three times that - once it settles down from its current all-time high of five times that. These are not fantasy projections based around unknowables. These are figures based around what is already happening now, nearly a full decade after we took the decision to leave. So of course Farage hates Brexit. Not because of all the things he thought it would change if it had been done right. No, he hates Brexit because, frankly, it's now out of fashion. Because the country now hates Brexit. And the only thing vital for brand Farage is to appear to be on the side of the working people when they hate something. When people wanted Brexit, Farage was happy to take the thanks. Now people see how much it's cost, he's happy to join the blame game. Much of the public knows this already. In Clacton when we visited for Farage's launch earlier this month, those we spoke to in the tired, underfunded town centre talked of how little life the place now had. They are desperate to see shops and restaurants and entertainment return to the seaside town. But the businesses tell you they can't get the staff any more, can't afford to stay open, can't import the stuff they used to without extreme lengths of red tape. We found plenty of Brexit regret that day. Taxis drivers now turning to odd jobs because the tourists weren't coming. Pier amusement arcades and restaurants which no longer had the workforce to stay open. These are tangible difficulties for a town that - to be fair - was suffering anyway long before Brexit. But we also found crowds welcoming and cheering Farage. He's not just any snake oil salesman, he's a celebrity snake oil salesman. And they welcome his turning the national gaze upon them. The question we should all be asking is why. Why are those who've seen life get harder not easier, immigration get higher not lower, red tape get longer not shorter, prepared to give this man and his party another chance? They've forgotten, perhaps, how many incarnations he has had. That when they first met Farage he was the leader of a party that no longer exists. Ukip had independence embedded into its very name. But if you'd asked those voters if they'd take independence with higher migration and higher costs I doubt many would have cheered it on. That project is now defunct. A shambles and a mess. So now he's at it again. Same bloke. New name. "Our politics is broken," Farage said at the launch yesterday. "There's been a breakdown in trust… We won't use the word manifesto because it will remind you of the lies politicians tell." It's comedy gaslighting from the man who made his name doing just that. Farage's Reform slogan is "Britain is broken". The small print, in the trade descriptions, should read: "Because we broke it". Emily Maitlis is a journalist, broadcaster and host of the podcast 'The News Agents' i@inews.co.uk Farage hates Brexit because, frankly, it's now out of fashion. The country now hates Brexit Load-Date: June 19, 2024  End of Document
