   British Labour aims to forge closer ties with the EU without reopening Brexit wounds CE Noticias Financieras English July 1, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 696 words Body    For a decade, leaving the European Union was the question that dominated British politics. Today it is hardly ever raised. Clearly, that's the way Labour Party leader Keir Starmer likes it. He has worked diligently to win back the support of working-class voters, millions of whom were attracted five years ago by Conservative Boris Johnson's promise to "deliver Brexit," when Labour campaigned to leave a path open to staying in the EU. Starmer's reward is the polls, which now predict him reaching Downing Street as prime minister this week, possibly with a historic majority. But if he gets there, he won't be able to keep Brexit out of the news for long. His mandate will be based on stimulating economic growth. Businesses say that would require lifting some of the barriers that Britain's exit from the EU has left in the way of their trade. And that, in turn, will likely mean reopening contentious negotiations with Brussels. The UK finally left the EU in January 2020 under Johnson. In their determination to turn the page after Brexit, Labour has ruled out rejoining the EU's single market or customs union. But they say it is still possible to remove trade barriers with the 27-nation bloc, to help businesses, particularly smaller ones, which have struggled with higher costs and red tape. Labour does not want to "reopen the wounds of the past," said Jonathan Reynolds, the Labour lawmaker who looks set to become business secretary in a Starmer cabinet. "It's clear we need a better deal and we can get real improvements," he told an event Thursday organized by the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC), the business lobby group that has said parties should stop "pussyfooting around" EU relations. A survey by accountancy firm Menzies showed that 1 in 3 British businesses want to reopen the Brexit deal reached under Johnson, and 1 in 5 want a new government to rejoin the single market, with 20% citing barriers as a result of Brexit as a factor limiting international expansion. AFFINITY PARTNER One of Labour's first pledges is to seek a veterinary agreement with the EU that would reduce border controls on animal products, a stumbling block for British farmers and importers. It also wants mutual recognition of certain professional qualifications and easier access for touring artists. Labour has presented these as relatively straightforward advances that it can achieve without reopening the Brexit deal reached under Johnson. But even those small steps would require tough decisions, said one EU source, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss hypothetical future negotiations. A veterinary agreement would require the U.K. to submit to dispute resolution through the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), the EU source said. This is anathema to Brexit advocates, who see it as a violation of British sovereignty. "Working with a like-minded partner, friend and ally is what everyone wants," the EU source said. "But the idea of having the same benefits you get as a member of the club gets a little more complicated." Anand Menon, professor of politics and director of the think tank UK in a Changing Europe, said Labour may be misjudging the EU's interest in renegotiating after years of clashes with British governments. The bloc already has a lot of work on its hands. And while the U.K. might want to improve technical issues in areas such as food, Brussels would want to talk about mobility: making it easier for people to live and work in the U.K., especially young people. "I think there will be a big change in style and some tinkering with substance," Menon said. The Conservatives say Labour's policies would "undo Brexit" by, among other things, subjecting the U.K. to CJEU rulings again. In a debate this week, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak accused Labour of planning a return to free movement of people as part of its plans for a better Brexit deal with the EU. Starmer said he would reject any deal with the EU that increased immigration. Labour's Reynolds said he wanted to improve the trade situation while offering benefits to the bloc. "It's not necessarily easy, but there's a negotiation, there's a process I can see that offers those things." Load-Date: July 2, 2024  End of Document
