   Business calls for deeper EU trade ties; Post-Brexit deal Lobby organisation tells politicians to 'stop walking on eggshells' over Europe Financial Times (London, England) June 27, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 438 words Byline: PETER FOSTER ; MICHAEL O'DWYER Body   Politicians vying to form the next government must stop "walking on eggshells" around improving EU trade ties, according to the head of the largest business organisation. Shevaun Haviland, director-general of the British Chambers of Commerce, will today urge the next government to deepen the EU-UK trade and co-operation deal in order to boost economic growth. "We must stop walking on eggshells and start saying it how it is. The current plan isn't working for our members," she will say at the group's annual international conference in London. Haviland's intervention comes as opinion polls put Labour on track to secure a large majority in the general election next Thursday on a platform that promises to lift Britain out of a decade of economic stagnation. The Office for Budget Responsibility, the fiscal watchdog, has said Brexit will cause a 4 per cent long-run hit to GDP, as well as a 15 per cent reduction in trade. Analysis published this month by the London School of Economics found that 20,000 small businesses had stopped exporting to the EU over red tape created by exiting the single market. The BCC, which represents more than 50,000 businesses employing 6mn people, has published a trade manifesto that calls for a series of measures to improve EU-UK trade. They include a mobility deal to enable young people to live and work in each others' countries, a policy Labour has already ruled out. Haviland will say the BCC stands ready to work with the next government on a long-term strategy for trade. "After six weeks of electioneering, businesses will be looking at the next government and who will be true to their word," she will add. Labour has been cautious about its plans for reducing the costs of Brexit, which was strongly backed by voters in "red wall" seats in the north of England that it hopes to win back from the Conservatives. The party has ruled out a return to the EU single market or a customs union with Brussels, while promising in its manifesto to improve ties by "tearing down unnecessary barriers to trade". However, the only concrete measures set out by Labour are a veterinary agreement with Brussels to help food and plant exports, a visa deal for touring musicians and improved terms for professionals, such as engineers and architects. Analysis by UK in a Changing Europe, a think-tank, this month said Labour's stated plans would have a "minimal" impact on reducing the economic costs of Brexit. Labour has sought to play down accusations from the Tories that it will seek to reverse Brexit if elected, with representatives of both sides clashing during a televised election debate on Monday. Load-Date: June 26, 2024  End of Document
