   Caught in the Brexit trauma; Britain is facing a change of power after 14 years of Conservative government. However, there is no mood of optimism Die Welt am Sonntag (English) June 30, 2024 Sunday  Copyright 2024 Axel Springer GmbH All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Pg. 8; No. 26 Length: 1169 words Byline: Eva Ladipo Body      London This article was supposed to be completely different. It was supposed to be encouraging. Not so long ago, things didn't look so bad, at least relatively speaking. It seemed as if the UK was finally returning to its role as the world's oldest democracy, as if it could once again be a role model; more composed, more stable and better armed than other democracies, whose foundations are under fire, especially from the far right, in this super election year. It looked as if Britain was bucking the global trend and there was no need to worry about this one election at least. After all, the pendulum of democracy in the British two-party system seems to be swinging back. After 14 years of Conservative government, a change is imminent. It is virtually certain that the Labour Party will come to power after the general election on July 4. No opinion poll contradicts the prediction. On the surface, the only question seems to be how large, very large or even larger the majority of the presumed new Prime Minister Keir Starmer will be. But this description of the situation falls short. Because beneath the surface of day-to-day politics, there is a similar ferment in the UK as elsewhere in the Western world. Like the Americans, French and Germans, the British are sometimes unable to escape destabilizing forces. Yet they should have known better long ago, after all, they have a decisive debacle ahead of the rest with Brexit. Seen in this light, the fact that not even the beleaguered British are immune to populist promises is particularly alarming. After all, a leader who does not stop stumbling does not bode well for the rearguard. To assess the role of the UK as a trendsetter, we need to look back just under a decade. It was the British who ushered in the new populist era. The financial crisis of 2008 had drastically exacerbated the already glaring differences between London and the periphery, rich and poor and top and bottom. According to polls, membership of the European Union (EU) was at the bottom of the list of problems facing ordinary Britons. But when Prime Minister David Cameron called a referendum on leaving the EU in 2016, the opportunity to vent his anger at the state of affairs came at just the right time. "Take back control" was also the magic formula of the Brexiteers under Boris Johnson, who took over the reins of government in 2019. The promise of regaining control over one's own life in the age of globalization was just as utopian as the campaign slogan "Make America Great Again ", with which Donald Trump triumphed in the USA. Not even Johnson himself had reckoned that his absurd promises would work and that he would win. It was therefore no wonder that the UK was plunged into chaos after the referendum. While word spread to the rest of the world about how susceptible the electorate is to lies if you are unscrupulous enough to promote them, the Conservatives tried in vain to reap the promised "Brexit dividend", which never materialized. Johnson even resorted to dissolving parliament and kicking out party colleagues who did not support his Brexit lies. His successor Liz Truss led the country to the brink of financial ruin within 49 days in 2022. At the same time, economists calculated how much poorer the country has become as a result of leaving. Brexit is estimated to cost the UK around five percent of its gross national product every year. However, because experts are considered members of the biased elite in the age of populism, many people are happy to ignore their figures. A so-called "Brexomertà" - a great silence - has settled over the country, which is being observed even during the election campaign. Neither the government nor the opposition wants to use the B-word. Politicians are refusing to face reality, even though a majority of the population has long considered the exit to be a mistake. This means that the most important and defining political issue of the past decade has been excluded from the election campaign. Other substantive issues hardly play a role either. Labour has no significant reforms on offer - neither for the ailing healthcare system nor for care, climate protection, immigration, underfunded schools, combating child poverty or public infrastructure. The situation is in part dramatic. Labour will therefore not owe its probably overwhelming election success to specific plans for the future, but to the simple fact that they are not the Tories. Most Britons will not vote for Labour, but will vote against the Tories with contempt. This negative energy is not nice, but it is understandable after fourteen years of Conservative government and an epochal mistake. The danger, however, is not the imminent change. Rather, it is what happens to the Tories after the election that causes fear. Because one of the oldest and most venerable parties in the world is threatening to leave the center and take a similarly precarious path as the Republicans in America. The battle for the wreckage that will remain of the party after July 4th has long since begun. It is unlikely to be won by the few representatives of traditional conservatism who survived Boris Johnson's purges and the general election. Instead, those whom respected journalist Andrew Neil describes as "nutters" are threatening to take the helm: "It is not in the interests of democracy that only a rump remains of the Tories, because then the nutters will take over." And they, Neil warns, "like Mr. Farage ". Nigel Farage is back in the election campaign like a spectre. As if Brexit had never happened, which was supposed to solve all the problems back then, the former Ukip leader, who is now running for the new Reform UK party, is back on the old record and raging against immigrants and the elite as ever. He is supported by sections of the right-wing press, who blame the Tories' decline on the moderate "wimps" in the party. Conservative Prime Minister Rishi Sunak will be glad to have the election campaign behind him, which began with a botched speech in the pouring rain and has not improved since. The latest reason for the disastrous poll figures is provided by several party friends who have bet on the early election date. The Gambling Commission is investigating. In times like these, when the "ruling class" is under general suspicion, such scandals are damaging to all those who want to preserve the status quo. However, this concern no longer seems to be very widespread in the Conservative Party of all parties. One guest at the Tories' summer ball reported: "It was unreal. Nobody acted as if we were going to win. It was a happy, cheerful evening, even though everything was burning outside. It was like the end of an era and the beginning of a new one." Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word. Document original Load-Date: June 29, 2024  End of Document
