   Delays push up costs of post-Brexit border system to £4.7bn; National Audit Office Financial Times (London, England) May 20, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 619 words Byline: PETER FOSTER Body   A government programme to build a post-Brexit trade border has been hit by delays and computer glitches that will push up the project's costs to at least £4.7bn, the National Audit Office has found. Ministers had promised to create the "world's most effective border" by next year in order to smooth the flow of goods between the UK and the rest of the world. But the core technology needed to deliver a digitally advanced border faced "several major challenges", according to the NAO report into the government's 2025 Border Strategy published today. "In our view, the programme's objectives and timescales are overly optimistic and continue to underestimate the complexity of what is required," it said. The future UK border aims to provide a one-stop shop for import, export and transit paperwork under what is called a "single trade window". However, the NAO found there was "no cross-government integrated delivery plan" for the strategy, which HM Revenue & Customs now says will be delivered "incrementally" by 2027. The NAO's downbeat assessment was delivered a month after the introduction of a post-Brexit border checks on EU food and plant imports was hit by IT glitches, causing widespread frustration among hauliers and importers. The NAO added that the Home Office was also struggling to deliver a new computer system needed for the next phase of the border in October, when all goods must be accompanied by additional "safety and security declarations". The NAO said the new system, called Cerberus, needed to overcome "legislative barriers" in order to share the data with law enforcement agencies. "The Home Office considers the programme will be challenging to deliver because of its overall complexity," it added. Gareth Davies, head of the NAO, said the government needed better cross- Whitehall planning and "a more realistic approach to digital transformation" to deliver the new digital border. Meg Hillier, chair of the House of Commons' public accounts committee, the parliamentary spending watchdog, said delays and changes "could have been avoided with a clearer vision and better planning", something the committee "often sees across government". Efforts to overhaul the UK's borders have been beset by political U-turns and delays that led to public funds being wasted. The report said ministers spent £62mn on a customs post at Dover that was later not required, while £258mn was spent building eight temporary border facilities to cope with additional demand that were also never needed. A £150mn contract awarded to Deloitte and IBM in May last year to deliver the first part of the £349mn single trade window programme was "several months" behind schedule, the NAO found. Brexit border costs, which have run to £2.6bn, included £531mn spent between 2020 and 2024 on a scheme to help British traders deal with Northern Ireland, the NAO said. Yet traders have seen little improvement, say experts. Anna Jerzewska of consultancy Trade & Borders said: "For the majority of traders, this represents additional costs and administrative burden." The past performance of UK customs computer programs suggested the single trade window was "unlikely to be fully completed in the next few years". David Henig, UK director at the European Centre for International Political Economy, said the report had exposed the gap between government rhetoric and the reality encountered by traders. The Cabinet Office said it was making "good progress" on the border rollout, including introducing the post-Brexit import checks this year in a way that minimised disruption. "We are launching the single trade window, which will make it easier for traders to provide information to government when importing goods," it said. Graphic    Post-Brexit border plans face major challenges, according to the NAO Load-Date: May 19, 2024  End of Document
