   Disinterest and disillusionment in town where 70% voted for Brexit; MANY IN MANSFIELD DON'T CARE ABOUT ELECTION ELECTION 2024 x Nottingham Post June 21, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 974 words Byline: OLIVER PRIDMORE Body   WHEN it comes to some of the major political earthquakes seen across the UK in recent years Mansfield has undoubtedly been at the heart of them. From the fall of Labour's 'Red Wall' to Brexit, this former industrial heartland has often been a sign of things to come across the country. If that remains the case, we're in for a very low turnout. Nottinghamshire's Brexit capital seems to have home to a strong degree of political apathy. Asked if they were following the general election campaign ahead of the July 4 vote, June Dutton said she was trying to "follow it as little as possible." The 75-year-old, in town with husband Peter Dutton, 76, said: "I'm Labour and he's Conservative, so we cancel each other out. "We'll definitely vote, but they keep making it a bit harder for people like us with all the postal voting and voter ID rules. You've got to register online and it's not like the days when you just turned up and put your tick in a box. They'll put off a lot of people." Despite not following the campaign, the couple had plenty of local gripes that may play a factor when they cast their vote. Potholes and the amount of housing development were among the main concerns, with Mr Dutton adding: "There's three-storey houses being built right behind us." Yet the couple are far from alone in choosing not to follow the general election campaign. James Gannon, 54, a site manager from Mansfield Woodhouse, said: "I've never voted. I think if I don't vote, then I can't moan. I just think about what it must be like if you've invested time and energy into something and it doesn't go the way you want it to. I'd rather go with the flow." Choosing not to follow politics does not mean Mr Gannon is without his concerns on the state of the country though, particularly the NHS. Having torn his tricep, Mr Gannon has been waiting weeks to get it scanned, yet such issues don't seem to make it any more likely that he will change the habit of a lifetime by voting this time around. Neither will some of those who could vote in a general election for the first time. One 19-year-old, who did not want to be named, said: "I don't really pay much attention to any of it. I didn't even know there was an election." Others seem resigned to the result, though not in the way you may expect, with one shopper declaring: "Everyone is talking about Labour, but the Tories will get back in." All this apathy and resignation seems remarkable in a town which has been at the centre of such political intrigue. When the 2016 referendum on leaving the EU was held, voting mostly took place by parliamentary constituency and Mansfield gave the strongest backing for Brexit in Nottinghamshire. Around 70% of those who voted in the town voted to leave the EU, with Rushcliffe being the only area of Nottinghamshire to vote for Remain. Most of the candidates who attended Nottinghamshire Live's Mansfield hustings on Wednesday were still committed to Brexit. Conservative candidate Ben Bradley said: "We wanted a tough Brexit that would have seen controlled borders, that would have seen more freedom, more commercial opportunity for us as a country. Some of that we've been able to do, but there is a long way to go, particularly dropping coronavirus in the middle of that made that very difficult." Mr Bradley said he would be a "vocal advocate" in Parliament for the kind of Brexit that he says Mansfield wants. Karen Seymour, from the Trade Union and Socialist Coalition, said: "I voted to leave the EU because I think it's a bosses' club not interested in the lives of working class people, in improving their living standards. Anything workers have gained, they have gained through struggle, not the EU." The only candidate not committed to Brexit was Phil Shields from the Green Party, who said: "The Green Party have made it quite clear that we're a pro-Europe party. I don't think Brexit has done anything in particular for Mansfield, I think if anything it was a catalyst for the last few years of deprivation that we've had and I think if another referendum was taken now, it would be quite a startling difference to the result we had before." Yet also backing Brexit was Labour's Steve Yemm, who said: "We have to make the most of Brexit, Brexit does present us opportunities, certainly around things like industrial policy. We now have the freedom to intervene in the way that industry works, manufactures and exports." Also backing Brexit in Mansfield was 61-year-old Alan Ashford, perhaps understandably given that he is a huge backer of Reform. Mr Ashford, in town with another Reform supporter, said: "We're both ex-miners and Labour let us down, the working class of Britain. It hasn't been this good since the referendum, it's the same atmosphere." If there is an atmosphere of excitement about the general election in Mansfield, it is one we struggled to pick up. It is strange then that such a higher number of candidates are having a go at Mansfield, and the race certainly looks very tight. Having been one of the first bricks in the Red Wall to fall in 2017, Ben Bradley increased his vote share by over 17% at the last election. Yet some polls now suggest a slight Labour lead in the town. When Keir Starmer talks about having changed the Labour Party, the key test for that claim will be whether he can win back seats like Mansfield. If he does, there will be a lot of work to do to get many in the town engaged with what he, and the entire political class, has to say. The candidates standing in Mansfield on July 4 are, presented in alphabetical order by surname: Zen Bilas (Independent); Ben Bradley (Conservative); Peter Dean (Socialist Labour Party); Wesley Milligan (Independent); Karen Seymour (Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition); Phil Shields (Green); Matthew Warnes (Reform UK); Michael Wyatt (Liberal Democrats); Stephen Yemm (Labour). Graphic    Mansfield was Nottinghamshire's Brexit capital JOSEPH RAYNORPeter Dutton has always voted Conservative, while his wife June always votes LabourJames Gannon says he has never voted and does not intend to change that habit Load-Date: June 21, 2024  End of Document
