   DIVIDING LINES, BREXIT WAGES AND THE NEED FOR IMMIGRATION Metro (UK) June 7, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 8 Length: 671 words Body   In his attack on Brexit, Tony Howarth (MetroTalk, Wed) uses leftist doublespeak when he says that Nigel Farage 'searches for things that drive us apart, not bring us together'. Rather the opposite is the case. Many people from different backgrounds will support Farage and Reform exactly because they alone in this election are calling for an end to leftist identity politics, which now divides our nation along the lines of race, gender, sexuality and religion, and which has been imposed upon all seams of society. Brexit was a vote for national self-determination and freedom and we must ensure it is not further betrayed by Tory or Labour governments and vote for Reform. John, Merseyside ? Farage has only come back to take over as Reform leader because of how far right the Conservatives have moved. There is a groundswell of people who are reacting positively to the things the Conservatives have been saying - whether it's about immigration, Brexit or trans people. It's important we tactically vote to get the Tories out and keep any nationalist parties like Reform and Britain First well away from parliament. And also, to those like Lois (MetroTalk, Thu), who says the 'non-woke, hardworking British' should not vote Reform because it would let in Labour, for the umpteenth time, being 'woke' isn't the insult Lois thinks it is. I would rather care about social justice than be selfish. Lu, Walthamstow ? A number of correspondents appear to conflate the term 'woke' with anything that they disagree with, when the actual point of 'wokeness' is to be aware of societal issues such as racism and inequality and to endeavour to take steps to remediate them. Supporters of the perpetuation of inequality, oppression and discrimination, meanwhile, are presumably content to remain dozy. Julian Self, Wolverton n ? Nigel Farage, who easily could have remained a well-paid member of the EU club with all its perks, should be thanked for bringing back control to our country. Mr Howarth claims Brexit has delivered nothing. How he comes to that conclusion is beyond me. We are no longer under the dictatorship of unelected EU commissioners, many chosen when losing their seats in parliament. And to avoid answering awkward questions, MPs can no longer blame those in Brussels. Leaving the EU means unscrupulous businesses can no longer legally exploit foreign workers (many from Eastern Europe). This kept UK wages down and created more foodbanks. We are now witnessing higher wages being paid. E Kirkaldy, Wakefield ? I hate to break it to Reform supporter C Porter from Manchester (MetroTalk, Wed), but we need more immigration into this country, not less. As our birth rate falls, we need youthful immigrants in order to keep our population young. The people willing to make the difficult journey here - and learn a whole new language to boot - are likely among the most promising workers their countries have to offer. And that's demonstrated by the contribution they make to the Treasury and to our economy and public services. Immigration isn't tearing our country apart - it's holding it together. Like C Porter, I too want a revolution - a revolution against lying politicians who are to blame for destroying Britain, who've been scapegoating immigrants for their own failure since time began. Ryan Cooper, London ? It doesn't seem to bother Reform voters that Farage's best friend Donald Trump is criminal subverter of democracy accused of serial groping - clearly these are of no consequence to Reform and its blind and deaf followers. Guy Wilkins, Kew ? Victoria Thomas-Bowen - charged with assault after Nigel Farage was doused with milkshake - says the Reform leader 'doesn't represent anything I believe in'. If that were to be used as an excuse for attacking politicians, it would be reminiscent of the far-right thugs who were armed with far more serious weapons than a milkshake, in the Washington insurrection of 2021. Eddy, Hemel Hempstead You are more likely to be published if you provide your name and location with your comment Load-Date: June 7, 2024  End of Document
