   Election 2024: Is Brexit on the ballot in Chelmsford?; Ahead of the election, Jessica Frank-Keyes is visiting the City's commuter hotspots. Next up, it's Chelmsford... City A.M. June 27, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 City A.M. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 1047 words Byline: Jessica Frank Body   THE COUNTY town of Essex, officially a city since 2012, is said to have once been - for a few days in 1381 - the capital of England. With almost 10 per cent of working residents commute into central London - and half of these to the Square Mile - Chelmsford is our second visit to a City commuter belt seat. Reform UK leader Nigel Farage is standing down the road in Clacton-on-Sea, and Essex heavily voted to leave the EU in 2016. The ramifications of Brexit appear to be alive and well here ahead of July 4. 'THEY'RE ALL THE SAME' - THE RISE OF REFORM UK Wandering on the bustling high street, people are surprisingly happy to discuss politics. And the message, loud and clear, is a sense of deep dissatisfaction with the status quo. "They're all the same," Chris, a business owner in his sixties, shakes his head. "I used to be an avid Conservative voter," he tells me, but this time, "I'll be voting Reform." While for a mother and daughter, it's a lack of GPs - with four week waits - and schools - with her eight-year-old granddaughter already on a secondary waiting list. "They don't seem to be living in the real world, do they?" the 61-year-old says. "I'll give Reform a go… it is a bit of a protest vote." I try to speak to the Reform UK candidate - Darren Ingrouille - but he doesn't get back to me. On his X, formerly Twitter feed, as first reported by Byline Times, are retweets in response to images of controversial 'Rivers of Blood' politician Enoch Powell. City A.M. approached Ingrouille and Reform UK for comment but has not received a reply. 'I'VE BEEN VERY FRUSTRATED AT TIMES TOO' - THE TORY PICK There are also specific complaints about the current Tory party. "They look down their noses at people who have a different view," one woman said. Rachel, another voter, adds: "I don't want to have to vote for Labour but anyone else feels like a wasted vote." I put this sense of frustration to the former Conservative MP standing for re-election in Chelmsford, Vicky Ford, a former financial services professional. She admits: "I understand why people are cross with us - and I've been very frustrated at times too." But she maintains she has support locally and says residents realise "fair or unfair, Reform is not going to win in Chelmsford". Ford's achievements in the seat, she says, include pushing forward "regionally important" plans to open a second station, Beaulieu Park, in Chelmsford. Other successes include the city's new medical school - "transformational" - and the building of a new GP megasurgery. But people want to know about the "next steps", which she says include plans to improve the "infamous Army and Navy junction" and increasing A&E and hospital capacity. Many of Chelmsford's city workers are in the insurance sector, Ford says, and the city has the "largest cluster" of insurance professionals outside London. New growth obligations on financial services regulators, she adds, will help "make sure we remain a world leader". Ford is also working to encourage firms to bring offshore insurance captives back to the UK. On Brexit, which Ford voted Remain on in 2016, before her 2017 election, she notes that Chelmsford was "more more marginally Leave" than other parts of Essex. "The Lib Dem candidate here is very pro-Europe and has always said that she would want to work to U-turn on that referendum result," she adds. 'LABOUR IS A REAL OPTION' - FOR THE RED TEAM Labour's support - among the people I spoke to - is certainly less vocal. One 19-year-old politics student tells me she'll be tactically voting Lib Dem. "It's very hard not to tactically vote - if I had a choice I would vote Green," she adds. "Essex is quite Conservative… I don't think we'll see much change over the next five years." But Labour's candidate, Richard Parry, despite gloomier expectations, insists he's "fighting to show people Labour is a real option". He says there are "no nogo areas" and reports a new "openness to our ideas and our party". Parry has lived in the city for a decade, and works on renewable energy campaigns, commuting into central London. He tells me: "Economically, Chelmsford has a vibrant economy. But I think we've been let down and we need change." Labour are also pledging to back the new Army and Navy roundabout upgrade, he says. Asked about the Brexit issue, Parry - who "personally voted Remain" - admits it isn't "top five" but says it does come up with voters. He says: "I respected the decision to leave. But I do think we need a closer relationship with the EU - that doesn't mean I think we should rejoin the single market and customs union. "I don't get a sense that there's an appetite to reopen that chaos and division." UK MUST 'RECOGNISE' BREXIT PROBLEM - A LIB DEM VISION But over a pot of tea, Liberal Democrat candidate - and deputy city council leader - Marie Goldman stresses: "Labour are out of the race here." The former Accenture management consultant came second to Ford in 2019 - and is determined to take her on again. "Probably the most common thing on the doorstep is 'well, I usually vote Conservative' but that is usually followed with 'I'm going to be voting differently this time'," she tells me. Brexit spurred Goldman on, initially as a campaigner, and now city and county councillor. Key issues locally include the NHS, the cost of living, and potholes. But more broadly, Goldman argues her business experience would make her a "helpful" asset in parliament. "We need people with lots of different experience in parliament, not just career politicians, and I'm certainly not one of those," she insists. Crucially, she wants to see "business investment" prioritised, and a "much closer trading relationship with Europe" in help with imports and exports. Businesses may broadly echo Goldman's argument - but will it resonate with voters? One couple in their forties tell me they're resigned to rising prices. "Does it change anything? Things are more global than a local election… the price of timber comes from Norway." Is Goldman worried about reopening a giant can of worms into British politics? "It's really important to recognise when you've got a problem", she says. "It's bizarre that in 2019, the whole election was about Brexit. And yet it's hardly been mentioned in this campaign… we need to work towards fixing that." Load-Date: June 27, 2024  End of Document
