   England can only get better after Tories' Brexit own goal Sunday Independent June 30, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 1313 words Byline: Declan Lynch Body   England play Slovakia this afternoon in the last 16 of Euro 24 and, honestly, no one has any idea how it will go. We should be fully confident that England will win - they have better players, at better clubs, making better money than God. Yet the remarkable levels of mediocrity they have displayed in the tournament, the total absence of what you might call a collective intelligence, leaves us wondering. On Thursday there's a general election in the UK and everyone knows how that's going to go. Labour will win, the Conservative Party will lose on a scale somewhere between demolition and annihilation - and this with hardly a mention by either party of Brexit because sometimes things are so big and so obvious and so utterly shameful there's no need and certainly no desire to talk about them. But even as they distract themselves by watching England trying to play football, everybody knows it will be a long way back, from Brexit and the Tory degenerates who made it happen. And of course these things are all related. To be fair to myself, I didn't wait for Euro 24 to see a clear analogy between the terrible energies of the Brexiteers and the typical England campaign at a major football tournament. It starts with this tremendous hubris, this nationalistic feeling that Johnny England is innately superior to Johnny Foreigner in most meaningful ways and certainly at the game of football which he invented. In this mood of jingoistic certainty a lot of disturbing evidence is ignored or even mocked - yes, English footballers and English people in general may look very good when they are in teams which contain many foreigners but what happens when you take away that foreign contribution? Well, in the fever dreams of the pumped-up patriots, the English actually get better when their native genius is unencumbered by alien influences and they take back control of their own affairs. Sadly, in most major football tournaments of the last 50 years, the record shows that when the English are indeed liberated from the burden of multinational co-ordination, they do not get better. They get worse. Football pundits are not allowed to talk about it either, but as they cast around for adequate explanations of why England were struggling against mighty Slovenia, one of them might have quipped good-naturedly that what they were looking at here was a vision of Brexit on 22 legs; that these English lads are accustomed to playing at a high level with lads from other countries and you can't just take away all those continental types without something very strange happening. Not necessarily in a good way. Like, why does this stuff that usually works so smoothly somehow not work any more? Why indeed? Now you might say that all nations have their own varieties of irrational exuberance, but most of them don't go to major tournaments with their top football writers glaring demonically at the team leaders across a delirious press room, demanding in all seriousness: "CAN WE WIN IT?" Especially when the accumulated evidence shows that in five decades, they haven't won anything. And when it goes wrong, it can get ugly. "Villains" like David Beckham or Marcus Rashford or Trent Alexander-Arnold echo the Brexiteers pinning their failures on the machinations of the Deep State - to avoid deeper truths, blame must be shifted. At these Euros we have also seen other countries acting out the broader state of the world, with Georgia in particular mad with joy at reaching the knockout stage - their celebrations reflecting the desire of their people to advance as far as possible towards the European Union. England, perversely, went in the opposite direction. And the footballers too, deprived of their own global synergies, have looked less than the sum of their parts. Yet while England at the Euros and the World Cup has always aroused such Brexity passions, there is one crucial difference: a tournament will last no more than a month every two years. But Brexit is for life. Indeed England has actually been relatively lucky in the football, getting the soft side of the draw for some time, including today's "easy" game against Slovakia, rather than the expected Netherlands. But in their political leaders such as Boris Johnson or Nigel Farage, they have been truly cursed. Such men are called "post-truth", though that has vaguely arty connotations, like "post-modernist". It is better to call them anti-truth, with Brexit itself being partly a reaction to another Big Tory Lie, that of "austerity". American journalist James Robins wrote: "Brexit was a retreat from hunger into myth; an embrace of antique fables about British pluck and derring-do... this election is the reckoning Brexit postponed." No, not even England beating Slovakia can make any difference now - the Tories are going to get smoked. But if England somehow come through today's ordeal, they'll have a quarter-final a day after the Conservative Party is perhaps wiped from the face of the earth. And on such a grand day for all England, who knows? Maybe they can rise again. Saipan in spotlight with another iconic moment The interconnectedness of all things could be felt last week in the decision of Julian Assange to choose a remote US Pacific Island territory as the location for his plea deal - a place called Saipan. Then we received the sad news of the death of Tommie Gorman, a veteran of Saipan in a very different conflict. For Irish readers of The Guardian report on Assange's court hearing, there was an added poignancy in the headline: "Global media circus bemuses sleepy Saipan." A large part of the article was based on the theme that Saipan "is not used to the spotlight, but all that changed with the WikiLeaks founder's arrival". And he had only chosen it because it is near Australia and is not part of the US mainland. There was even a specific mention of the only interesting other thing that allegedly happened there, the visit of the Japanese Emperor in 2005. Oh to see ourselves as others see us. There we were thinking that "our" Saipan was now as firmly embedded in the global consciousness as Pearl Harbor, only to discover that… well, that it's not. Certainly one could imagine Tommie Gorman writing a discreet note to the reporter, pointing out that adjustments might be needed in later editions, to correct this false impression that nothing had ever happened in Saipan until last Wednesday. Tommie was one of those journalists who also believed that he had a role in society as a human being. His service to the nation in the theatre of war during the "Saipan" World Cup was a perfect example of how a journalist can try to change things for the better. In the social and political sense, he was what we call "a good actor". In that same sense, Assange is "a bad actor". Two things: WikiLeaks published Hillary Clinton's leaked emails, a major "assist" for Donald Trump in the 2016 campaign, which I would consider a very bad act; and it emerged accidentally that Assange was visited by Trump's mate Nigel Farage while he was holed up in the Ecuadorian embassy in London. A kind of a Bad Actor's Ball there. There's no way of knowing this for sure, but here's an educated guess - Assange is the bad actor that the other bad actors call Jean-Claude Van www.Damme.TV just not equipped to handle anti-truth mob It's been stated a few times in this column that television has no adequate response to the anti-truth populist, and the Biden v Trump debate proved it again. I mean, we could just stop stating this, the way that television has mostly stopped trying to deal with it. But it's still a massive breach in the system through which the anti-truthers are swarming. And it was there long before Joe Biden slipped over the hill. The idea of "fact-checking" Trump after 90 minutes of prime-time anti-truthing is just not serious. And this situation is getting more serious all the time. Graphic    England will take on Slovakia in Euro 24 in what could be a testing encounter. Picture by PA Load-Date: June 30, 2024  End of Document
