   Environmental scandal of Brexit; RECORD VIEW Daily Record and Sunday Mail May 18, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 286 words Body   WE already know Brexit has been an unmitigated disaster for Scotland in so many ways. Carried out against the wishes of Scots, this Tory madness has crashed our economy, tangled up our businesses in red tape, reduced our pool of workers and taken away the freedoms and rights for all of us that came with European citizenship. Even going on holiday has been made more difficult thanks to our country being torn out of the EU. Now Scotland's environment and world-famous wild places are being placed under threat. The Daily Record reports today how experts fear the loss of access to EU courts and institutions has made it more difficult to bring polluters to justice. Scotland and the UK previously followed EU law in many areas, including with regards to the environment. But now our system for keeping polluters in check is in disarray - yet another unintended drawback of the unwanted disaster of Brexit. Against this backdrop, Scotland is suffering "continued environmental deterioration", according to Strathclyde Uni law expert Prof Campbell Gemmell. All at a time when we're crying out for stronger environmental protections amidst a nature and climate emergency. Scotland faces disastrous levels of nature loss, with one in nine species at risk of wipeout. Meanwhile, our seas, rivers and landscape - as well as our urban centres - face a growing threat from industrial-scale pollution. Calls from the Environmental Rights Centre for Scotland (ERCS) for a strong, dedicated Scottish Environment Court to uphold anti-pollution laws should therefore be seriously considered. The Tories' disastrous Brexit has taken so much from Scots already - let's not let it wreck our environment as well. BREXIT WAVE OF FILTH - PAGE 20 Load-Date: May 18, 2024  End of Document
