   EU wants to avenge Brexit - and Starmer knows it; A push for closer ties with Brussels from many Labour supporters could fail to materialise, reports Eir Nolsøe The Sunday Telegraph (London) June 9, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 28 Length: 1205 words Byline: Eir Nolsøe Body   One topic has been notably, and some might say blissfully, absent in this election debate: Brexit. Voters struggling to secure GP appointments and coping with much higher living costs have bigger issues to think about, polling suggests. Meanwhile, both parties have reasons to gloss over the topic. After years of squabbling over Brexit, the Tories are keen not to set off another round of infighting. Sir Keir Starmer wants to reassure Leave voters they can trust him. This has led Labour to take a tougher stance on EU integration than in past years. The party in late April rejected proposals to introduce free movement for under-30s, a suggestion from the European Commission. Sir Keir has been clear there is no possibility of rejoining the single market under Labour. Yet many Remain-backing Labour supporters and MPs will probably expect closer ties with the EU if the party is elected. Polling of City investors suggest almost 90pc expect tighter integration. Suggestions that a Labour government would start "dating" the EU again hinge on a scorned expartner being open to rekindling the relationship. That looks unlikely. "They spend very little time in Brussels thinking about the UK," says Anand Menon, a professor at King's College London and the director of UK in a Changing Europe. "There are political threats, there's a migration issue, there are all sorts of simmering fights within the European Union about whether Ursula von der Leyen is reappointed or what to do about the green deal." The UK does not even make the list of priorities, he says. Items on Labour's EU wish-list include striking a veterinary deal to avoid checks on agricultural food imports such as meat, vegetables and flowers. The party also wants closer co-operation with Brussels on security and defence, with David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, attending monthly meetings on the foreign affairs council. Not only is the UK not a priority, however, there are many in Brussels who are still smarting from the affront of Brexit in the first place, says Menon. "There is still quite a sense in the European Union that what the UK gets can't be as good as membership." A change in political leadership will do little to help. "There are some people in Labour who think that just because they are not the Conservatives, the EU will make concessions. That's absolutely wrong," Menon says. "Anyone who has negotiated with the EU is well aware of the fact that it doesn't do favours and negotiates on the basis of its interests." He adds: "If the Labour majority is smaller than expected, and if the Conservative Party continues to be massively Eurosceptic, there's less incentive for the EU to negotiate with us because the danger is a new Conservative government comes in and overturns everything." There are questions about how the European elections might influence the relationship. While European Parliament elections are notoriously hard to predict because of low turnout, polls have suggested a surge in support for Right-wing parties, with Marine Le Pen's National Rally and Giorgia Meloni's Brothers of Italy expected to increase their seats. Counterintuitively, it might improve the relationship to have the Eurosceptics in charge. "They have been quite outspoken in saying that they admire Brexit," Menon says. "Doing bilateral deals with the UK is a really good way to annoy the European Commission, which will play well with their voter bases." In the UK, after years of squabbling about Europe, many voters have Brexit fatigue. "I think a lot of people just don't really want to hear that much about the EU," says David Henig, a trade expert who runs the UK arm of think tank European Centre For International Political Economy. "They've had enough of it. It's been going on for years and years and years. It was all just a bit too overwhelming." Only 8pc of the public cited Britain's future relationship with Brussels as one of the top three most important factors determining their vote. When drilling down further, a meagre 2pc said it the single most important issue when deciding, YouGov found. "It has just dropped so low down people's priorities. Domestic issues have massively taken over and that started soon after the last election. It is dwarfed by things like the economy, the cost of living, health, climate change and even housing," says Adam McDonnell, from YouGov. "Across both parties, if you start bringing up Brexit it may potentially be perceived to be deflecting from other issues." Menon adds: "The British public is bored of Brexit. There is absolutely no appetite for a big national conversation about it." To appeal to the general voter, avoiding the topic would seem a sensible approach. "Even without saying anything about Brexit, Labour are picking up large numbers of Remain voters," says Menon. Yet despite such factors, Sir Keir may quickly find the ghost of Europe coming back to haunt his government like it has with others. While Leave voters have mostly moved on, many of those who voted Remain still begrudge the result, McDonnell says. The latest voting intention numbers suggest most Remain voters plan on backing Sir Keir at the election. "Labour voters are overwhelmingly in favour of rejoining the EU. If we ask the question in isolation, 80pc of Labour voters would vote to rejoin," he says. If elected, "there will be a lot of pressure from backbench MPs and other campaign groups to go further" in strengthening the ties than the party has suggested it plans to, says Henig. Just as the Conservatives in favour of a hard Brexit formed the European Research Group (ERG), he suggests hardline Remainers may form a "reverse" ERG fraction in Labour. "Something like that can definitely be expected," Henig says. Another push for closer ties will come from business groups, who are warning that their members are being held back by trade restrictions. The British Chambers of Commerce has made improving "EU relations to cut costs for businesses" one of its key election lobbying points. William Bain, head of trade policy, says the group is pushing for "close alignment on regulations that impact Britain's global trade, such as standards on manufactured goods". He says: "The Government should only diverge from EU rules where it adds value to UK plc." The Confederation of British Industry is also lobbying for closer relations. Sean McGuire, Europe and international director, said: "Our members don't want politics winning out over economic common sense. They want to see both sides working in the spirit of openness, collaboration and compromise." Henig says the best Britain can hope for is a "patchwork" of small agreements. "There will be lots of talk but there will be a lot of reluctance to go too far too fast. There is a lot of caution on both sides about making too many big changes," he says. "Nothing will make a big difference on growth. We're not going to rejoin the EU any time soon". If Labour wins power, the relationship between London and Brussels may become more civil but "in practical terms I don't think it will change very much," Menon says. 'Nothing will make a big difference on growth. We're not going to rejoin the EU anytime soon' 'They spend very little time in Brussels thinking about the UK' Load-Date: June 9, 2024  End of Document
