   FM accuses Tories and Labour of 'turning their backs' on Scotland over EU The Herald (Glasgow) June 25, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright 2024 Newsquest Media Group All Rights Reserved  Section: Pg. 4 Length: 428 words Byline: By Katrine Bussey, PA Scotland Political Editor  Body   The Tories and Labour have both "turned their back on Scotland's interest" by refusing to consider rejoining the European Union, Scotland's First Minister John Swinney has insisted. The SNP leader used a campaign speech in Aberdeen to hit out at the "truly disastrous outcome" the Brexit referendum has had on Scotland. He highlighted the impact that the ending of freedom of movement had had on businesses and the economy, with Mr Swinney saying: "You can't be a party of Brexit and a party of growth." Speaking at Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen, Mr Swinney insisted: "As First Minister, I cannot sit back and accept the damage of Brexit that Labour will continue to impose. "That will hurt too many people, it will hurt public services and it will hurt businesses." Leaving the EU has cost Scotland £2.3 billion in public revenue, Mr Swinney said - arguing that a "conservative estimate" suggested there was now about £1.6 billion less to spend on the NHS and other public services as a result. He added: "To put that into context, £1.6 billion is the equivalent of more than one in six of our NHS staff." Mr Swinney said that "given the damage that Brexit has caused, it is absolutely astonishing that none of the Westminster parties are interested in repairing that damage" - warning Scots that backing either Labour or the Conservatives next week would be "a vote for continued Brexit damage". Arguing that "the Westminster parties have turned their back on Scotland's interests", Mr Swinney was clear that "Scotland's interests lie firmly in being part of the European Union". His comments came eight years on from the result of the UK's referendum on EU membership being declared - with the UK voting narrowly to leave, while Scotland overwhelmingly backed remain. Adding that independence was now the only way Scotland would "ever regain the benefits of EU membership", Mr Swinney insisted the referendum had showed that Scotland "simply does not matter to the Westminster establishment". The referendum result "demonstrated that the UK is  not a partnership of equal nations", the SNP leader stated. He added: "The fact that Scotland voted to remain ultimately mattered not one jot to Westminster. "That's not equality - it's a 'know your place' attitude. "While yesterday was the anniversary of the Brexit vote, today is the anniversary of people in Scotland waking up to the new reality. "The reality not just that we were about to be dragged out of the EU against our will. "But the reality that Scotland's voice simply does not matter to the Westminster establishment." Load-Date: June 25, 2024  End of Document
