   FM blasts parties on EU stance The Press and Journal June 25, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Aberdeen Journals Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 352 words Byline: KATRINE BUSSEY Body   The Tories and Labour have both "turned their back on Scotland's interest" by refusing to consider rejoining the European Union, Scotland's First Minister John Swinney has said. The SNP leader used a campaign speech in Aberdeen to hit out at the "truly disastrous outcome" Brexit has had on Scotland. He highlighted the impact that the ending of the freedom of movement had had on businesses and the economy, saying: "You can't be a party of Brexit and a party of growth." Speaking at Robert Gordon University, Mr Swinney said: "As first minister, I cannot sit back and accept the damage of Brexit that Labour will continue to impose. That will hurt too many people, it will hurt public services and it will hurt businesses." Leaving the EU has cost Scotland £2.3 billion in public revenue, Mr Swinney said - arguing that a "conservative estimate" suggested there was now about £1.6bn less to spend on the NHS and other public services as a result. He added: "To put that into context, £1.6bn is the equivalent of more than one in six of our NHS staff." Mr Swinney said that "given the damage that Brexit has caused, it is absolutely astonishing that none of the Westminster parties are interested in repairing that damage" - warning Scots that backing either Labour or the Conservatives next week would be "a vote for continued Brexit damage". Arguing that "the Westminster parties have turned their back on Scotland's interests", Mr Swinney was clear that "Scotland's interests lie firmly in being part of the European Union". He urged Scots to back his party if they believe "Brexit was a mistake". Labour's shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, who was campaigning in Scotland, said that while the party would not be "revisiting" the Brexit decision, the party wanted a closer relationship with the EU. She stated: "This question of our membership is a settled one, and Labour will not be taking the UK back into the single market, the customs union or bringing back free movement of Labour. "But we do want to forge a closer relationship to make it easier for great British businesses, great Scottish businesses to export." Graphic    'DISASTROUS OUTCOME': John Swinney condemned Brexit. Load-Date: June 25, 2024  End of Document
