   General election 2024 LIVE: Sunak heads to Edinburgh The Herald June 24, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 6385 words Body   7:06pm Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said he would meet with JK Rowling after the author said at the weekend that Labour had -abandoned- her and others campaigning for women-s rights. Asked at an event hosted by The Sun why people like the Harry Potter author think he has abandoned women and what has gone wrong, Sir Keir said: -I respect what she says and I welcome the debate.- Asked if he would have a meeting with Rowling and try to bring her back, Sir Keir said: -Of course I-d meet with her, of course I would and, you know, my approach in life, I came into politics really late, I-m not as tribal as everybody else. -I-ve run a public service, my view is if there-s an issue or a challenge, roll up sleeves, get people around the table and talk through the issues and find a way forward, so I-ll always talk to anyone about this. -The only rule I suppose I-d set is we-ve got to treat each other with common respect, and JK Rowling, I respect her and I don-t suggest for a minute that she doesn-t, you know, she-s made some really important points. -I-d welcome that discussion because I do think that we-ve made huge progress on women-s rights under Labour governments and equality, massive progress. There-s more work to be done if we are privileged to come in to serve this country.- 6:15pm Rishi Sunak said voters could believe him when he warned about Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer because he had been right about the dangers Liz Truss posed to the economy. Discussing his Tory party leadership contest with Ms Truss during The Sun-s leadership event, he said: -I was right then when I warned about Liz Truss and that-s why all of you can trust me now when I also warn about the damage that Keir Starmer would do to our economy. -In that election, everyone said I was going to lose, I was saying something that no-one wanted to hear, but I was saying it because I believed it, and I-m telling you again now, it all seems a bit familiar, if Keir Starmer-s your prime minister the economy is going to suffer and all of you are going to suffer. -I don-t want to see that happen. That-s why I-m carrying on going every day at this election, I believe in what I-m saying and I want to stop those tax rises happening for all of you.- His comments were greeted by a round of applause from the audience. 5:18pm The Conservative Party is a -shower of s**t-, former Olympic rower and Tory candidate James Cracknell has said in a campaign video. The double Olympic gold medallist posted a video to his Facebook page in which he strongly criticised his own party, but insisted he still believed -the Conservative way is the best for the country-. He said: -Two weeks out from the Olympics and if we are competing against the Conservative Party, my teammates and I would be saying they are a shower of s**t.- In an apparent reference to the gambling scandal engulfing the Tory campaign, he added: -And if one of my teammates got caught for cheating, they-d be dead to me. -That abuse of trust is unforgiveable.- His comments follow further revelations over the weekend that the Conservative Party-s chief data officer Nick Mason has taken a leave of absence amid claims he placed bets on the election date, along with campaigning director Tony Lee. Mr Lee-s wife, Tory candidate Laura Saunders, and the Prime Minister-s former parliamentary aide, Craig Williams, are also under investigation by the Gambling Commission. Explaining why he was still campaigning despite his negative view of his own party, Mr Cracknell said: -I believe the Conservative way is the best for the country. Freedom to succeed, protecting our national security, and personal responsibility. -If any party deserves to have the Union jack on its literature, it-s the Conservative Party, and if any candidate should have it on their shoulders, it-s me, because I-ve been there.- Mr Cracknell is contesting Colchester after the previous MP, Conservative Will Quince, decided to leave Parliament after nine years as its representative. Colchester was held by the Liberal Democrats between 1997 and 2015, before Mr Quince won it for the Conservatives. In 2019, he secured a majority of more than 9,000 votes, but polls suggest Labour could be on course to win the seat. Mr Cracknell promised to be -a fresh voice- who -isn-t afraid to challenge, isn-t going to take a backward step, and that isn-t afraid to drive the Conservative Party, the right party, back to where it should be-. 3:21pm Labour will meet with JK Rowling in a bid to offer her 'assurances' over the protection of women-only spaces. Rachel Reeves has made the offer to the Harry Potter author after she suggested she wouldn't be voting Labour after it had 'abandoned' her and others campaigning for women's rights. Rowling was a member of the Labour Party and had made donations in the past too but she said she would 'struggle to support them' in the General Election next week. She has been a strong advocate for the rights of biological women after criticising the Scottish Government's proposals to introduce self identification for transgender people. The reforms passed at Holyrood but it was blocked by the UK Government and it meant the gender recognition legislation was never implemented. Now reports suggest a Labour government could make make it easier for people to legally transition by removing the need for them to prove they have lived as their preferred gender for two years. The Times newspaper reported this will be replaced with a two-year -reflection period-, with the party also set to drop the number of doctors needed to approve a person-s gender recognition certificate - which recognises them in their preferred gender - from two to one. Reeves, however, insisted protection for single sex spaces for women would -absolutely stay-. 2:48pm Rishi Sunak has today launched the Scottish Conservatives manifesto with an attack on Labour over independence, the European Union and North Sea oil and gas. On the eighth anniversary of the Brexit referendum the Prime Minister accused Sir Keir Starmer of a potential -sellout- over fishing to the EU. A series of polls has put the Conservatives considerably behind Labour in the race for Number 10 and also suggest the party faces challenges from the SNP in seats in the north east of and south of Scotland. They also face a tough challenges from the right from Nigel Farage's Reform UK party which is trying to appeal to disillusioned Tory voters. -It is only the Scottish Conservatives that will stand up for the North Sea-s fishing industry," he said in a speech at the Apex Hotel in Edinburgh. -The EU are already making clear that the price of any deal that Labour wants is a sellout of our fishing industry, and who doubts that Keir Starmer would pay that. -And while the SNP would surrender all of our new freedoms, it is only the Scottish Conservatives who will stand up for Scotland-s farmers from the borders to the north east. "We will legislate for a UK-wide food security target. We will increase farming funding and ringfence it, and this will require the Scottish Government to report on how this money is being spent to support our farmers and boost our food security.- 2:17pm Kemi Badenoch has hinted at having Tory leadership ambitions, joining other hopefuls in jostling for position ahead of the General Election. The Business Secretary, who is seen as a frontrunner to replace Rishi Sunak should he lead the Conservatives to defeat on July 4, said that -we will talk about leadership things after an election- as she did not rule out a tilt at the top job. She insisted that -we need to focus on this election- at a business event that many in Westminster will have been watching for signs of her intention to run in a future Tory contest as the party braces for an expected defeat. It came after a trio of possible Tory leadership contenders made interventions over the weekend, with former immigration minister Robert Jenrick saying the party was the -natural home for Reform voters-, Home Secretary James Cleverly leaving open the door to a bid, and former home secretary Dame Priti Patel pressing the case for lower taxes in a rallying cry to voters. Ms Badenoch was asked about her own intentions at a debate hosted by the Institute of Directors and Bloomberg on Monday. She insisted there was -no better job- than Business and Trade Secretary, which -is a lot easier and a lot less pressured than being prime minister-. 2:17pm Kemi Badenoch has hinted at having Tory leadership ambitions, joining other hopefuls in jostling for position ahead of the General Election. The Business Secretary, who is seen as a frontrunner to replace Rishi Sunak should he lead the Conservatives to defeat on July 4, said that -we will talk about leadership things after an election- as she did not rule out a tilt at the top job. She insisted that -we need to focus on this election- at a business event that many in Westminster will have been watching for signs of her intention to run in a future Tory contest as the party braces for an expected defeat. It came after a trio of possible Tory leadership contenders made interventions over the weekend, with former immigration minister Robert Jenrick saying the party was the -natural home for Reform voters-, Home Secretary James Cleverly leaving open the door to a bid, and former home secretary Dame Priti Patel pressing the case for lower taxes in a rallying cry to voters. Ms Badenoch was asked about her own intentions at a debate hosted by the Institute of Directors and Bloomberg on Monday. She insisted there was -no better job- than Business and Trade Secretary, which -is a lot easier and a lot less pressured than being prime minister-. 1:59pm The Prime Minister has said he believes he got the timing of the General Election right. During a media huddle in Edinburgh, he was asked if he would have wanted more months to make his case. He said: -No - The most important job I had when I was Prime Minister was to restore economic stability back to our country after what has been a really difficult few years with Covid and the war in Ukraine. -My priority was bring inflation down, because inflation was eating into everyone-s pay packets, their savings, making everyone feel the challenges of the cost of living.- He said the UK economy grew faster than others in the G7 in the first quarter of the year. Mr Sunak added: -That-s why it-s the right moment, now that we have that foundation, for the country to consider what future it wants.- 1:39pm John Swinney has blamed Brexit for the rising cost of living and an increase in food costs for the ordinary member of the public. The First Minister was writing for The Herald on the eighth anniversary of Brexit being voted through and reiterated his stance that it has been a failed experiment and a move to a closer relationship with the EU should be a priority. He wants to see Scotland get a place back in the EU and believes it-s in the best interests of everyone for it to happen. Swinney has been vocal in his criticism of Brexit and suggests that the Tories and Labour are doubling down on it and it will continue to hurt Scotland and the rest of the UK. Swinney is certain that it remains a key talking point for voters and has told the public that only the SNP offer something different with their beliefs that the UK should admit it got it wrong over leaving the European Union and take a step back. John Swinney has outlined his wishes for a return to the EU (Image: PA) The cost of living has been a major worry for the majority of the population over the last few years and with it not looking like changing in the immediate future, he-s calling for things to change and explained why the main parties in Westminster are doing nothing to change that with no focus on what Brexit has caused. He said: -It-s high time therefore to talk about Brexit in this election - because it goes to the heart of people-s top concerns: the NHS, the cost of living and the resilience of the economy. -It has been a major contributor to food prices going up and it-s wiped billions of pounds from the economy compared with EU membership. Less money in our economy means less tax revenue that could have been spent on the health service. -The SNP is offering a different future - we want Scotland back in the EU as soon as possible and we want the UK to have the closest possible relationship with Europe - that-s in all our interests. -Even before Brexit, the UK economy was displaying alarming weaknesses: low productivity, which is the key driver of living standards, low growth, high inequality and high levels of poverty. -Nothing that has been said by the Westminster parties in this campaign suggests that dismal trend is going to change. -In fact, they are doubling down on the failed Brexit-based UK economic model that is taking Scotland in the wrong direction. -But that of course demands an alternative: a plan for a better future for Scotland so that we can raise living standards and build a more resilient, fairer economy.- 1:32pm A short take from me on the Scottish Conservative manifesto launch in Edinburgh. Follow our coverage on the @heraldscotland pic.twitter.com/uSW1aJcKZF - Kathleen Nutt (@kacnutt) June 24, 2024 1:04pm Rishi Sunak has shown an -astonishing lack of leadership- by failing to suspend Conservatives facing investigation into betting on the date of the General Election, shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves has insisted. Ms Reeves said Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer had -been really clear- that -if this had been Labour candidates, their feet would not have touched the ground-. Speaking during a visit to a windfarm in East Renfrewshire, the shadow chancellor said: -When wrong doing takes place in Labour, candidates are suspended. That is not an easy thing to do but it is the right thing to do.- She stated: -It is an astonishing lack of leadership from Rishi Sunak that these candidates are still in place, they have still got the Conservative rosette. -Rishi Sunak is now so weak he is not even able to suspend people who are accused of profiteering from inside information. It is frankly one rule for Conservative candidates and staffers and another rule for everybody else.- 12:57pm Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has promised to -stand full square behind Scotland-s North Sea oil and gas industry-. Speaking in Edinburgh, Mr Sunak said: -Our North Sea industry isn-t safe with Labour.- He added: -The Conservative Government that I lead will always stand full square behind Scotland-s North Sea oil and gas industry. -We-re committed to new licences, more investment in infrastructure and skills and energy security for our country. We-ll deliver a secure future for the North Sea industry and for the workers that it employs, whereas Labour want to stop all new licences in the North Sea from day one of a Labour government. -Keir Starmer and Ed Miliband want to tax the UK-s oil and gas sector and the 100,000 Scottish jobs that it supports into oblivion.- 12:13pm Rishi Sunak said he was not aware of any other Conservative candidates being investigated by the Gambling Commission and ruled out that he was facing the probe. -(The Gambling Commission) don-t talk about the individuals that they are investigating,- the Prime Minister told journalists in a huddle in Edinburgh. -What I can tell you is I am not aware of any other candidate that they are looking at.- 11:45am Rishi Sunak has again hit back at the Reform UK leader-s comments about Russia-s invasion of Ukraine. Speaking in Scotland, he said: -You all heard what Nigel Farage said about Ukraine. -That plays into Putin-s hands. That kind of appeasement is dangerous for Britain-s security, the security of our allies that rely on us and will only embolden Putin.- 11:45am Rishi Sunak has accused Labour of a potential -sellout- to the European Union. In his Edinburgh speech, the Prime Minister said: -It is only the Scottish Conservatives that will stand up for the North Sea-s fishing industry, too. -The EU are already making clear that the price of any deal that Labour wants is a sellout of our fishing industry, and who doubts that Keir Starmer would pay that. Prime Minister Rishi Sunak speaking during the launch of the Scottish Conservative party's General Election manifesto at the Apex Grassmarket Hotel in Edinburgh. (Image: Jane Barlow/PA Wire) -And while the SNP would surrender all of our new freedoms, it is only the Scottish Conservatives who will stand up for Scotland-s farmers from the Borders to the North East. "We will legislate for a UK-wide food security target. We will increase farming funding and ringfence it, and this will require the Scottish Government to report on how this money is being spent to support our farmers and boost our food security.- 11:37am PM attacks Reform saying vote for Reform would let SNP in through the back door. pic.twitter.com/o1RZKSSrKV - Kathleen Nutt (@kacnutt) June 24, 2024 11:23am PM also stepping up attack on Labour saying North Sea oil and gas industry wouldn-t be safe under Labour. pic.twitter.com/xfxudqM5Wa - Kathleen Nutt (@kacnutt) June 24, 2024 11:14am PM now addressing activists. He says only the Conservatives can 'stand up to the nationalists'. pic.twitter.com/uiOsGrAEap - Kathleen Nutt (@kacnutt) June 24, 2024 11:09am Douglas Ross on SNP attack. Key election battles between Tories and SNP in seats in NE and south of Scotland pic.twitter.com/rJ3CUzbFIv - Kathleen Nutt (@kacnutt) June 24, 2024 11:01am Douglas Ross says election pivotal for Scotland, wants 'end of division' and insists SNP on the backfoot. pic.twitter.com/9OP1p9fBla - Kathleen Nutt (@kacnutt) June 24, 2024 10:57am Liberal Democrat leader Sir Ed Davey said Prime Minister Rishi Sunak should do more to respond the the election betting row. He told the PA news agency: -I do think the Conservative Party could do far more. It feels to me like, as has been so often the case during this Parliament, they seem to be in it for themselves, not for the public service. -You see one rule for the Conservatives and another rule for others. -And I think that-s one of the reasons why we-re seeing lifelong Conservatives across the country, people in the Blue Wall seats and in the West Country where only the Liberal Democrats can beat the Conservatives, a lot of them are coming to vote for our candidate.- 10:52am Liberal Democrat leader Sir Ed Davey donned overalls and a hi-vis jacket to clean an ambulance during a campaign visit in target seat Wimbledon in south-west London. On his visit to Wimbledon ambulance station, he chatted to staff and stroked post-traumatic stress disorder assistance dog Teddy. The Lib Dem leader then used a jet wash to hose down an ambulance, catching watching photographers as the spray bounced off the vehicle. He was making the visit to highlight his warning that there are now just -10 days left to save the NHS-. 10:49am Scottish Conservative manifesto launch about to get underway in Edinburgh. PM and Douglas Ross due to address candidates and activists. pic.twitter.com/rMorqnBnGN - Kathleen Nutt (@kacnutt) June 24, 2024 10:29am Labour-s clean energy plans will -turbocharge- the Scottish economy, the party-s shadow chancellor is expected to say during a General Election campaign visit to Scotland today. Rachel Reeves will set out what she considers will be the economic benefits of Labour-s green investment plans - including lower bills and 53,000 jobs - on a visit to a wind farm on Monday morning. She will be joined by Scottish Labour leader Anas Sarwar and together they will argue their Warm Homes Plan will cut energy bills for good by investing in cheaper, clean power sources and upgrading homes. Rachel Reeves They say the plan will invest 6.6 billion across the UK over the next parliament if they are elected to govern in July, creating an estimated 16,000 jobs in Scotland. Labour has also pledged to set up a publicly owned GB Energy company based in Scotland, which will be capitalised with 8.3 billion in the first parliament. Party leaders say their plans will create 69,000 new green jobs in Scotland alone. 9:42am The next UK government -must empower Scotland- with the devolution of all tax and employment powers and significantly enhanced borrowing powers, the Scottish Greens argue. The party-s manifesto calls for the full devolution of taxation and employment powers to Scotland, including powers over corporation tax, inheritance tax, environmental taxes, minimum wage and alcohol and tobacco levies. The Scottish Greens back independence and have called for the devolution of powers to call referendums so politicians sitting in Holyrood can decide whether another vote should be held on whether or not Scotland should be an independent country. The party acknowledges some additional powers have been passed to Scotland over the last decade but insists it still only manages around 40% of its taxes and around 60% of public spending. Co-leader Patrick Harvie said: -Independence is right at the heart of our vision for a fairer, greener Scotland in Europe. It would ensure that we always get the governments we vote for and would allow us to do far more to protect people and planet. Patrick Harvie (Image: PA) -Yet if there is one thing that unites the Labour Party and the Tories it is a refusal to respect basic democracy and allow the people of Scotland to vote on our future. -That growing urgency for independence does not mitigate the need to rapidly expand and enhance the powers of our Scottish Parliament and our communities so that we can fairly tax polluters and turbo-charge our transition to a greener economy. -The last 14 years have seen a Tory government that Scotland rejected, riding roughshod over devolution and inflicting punishing restrictions and cuts on our budgets. -With very limited powers we have taken important progressive steps, allowing us to deliver free bus travel for young people, a real living wage for public sector contractors and a Scottish Child Payment that is lifting children and families out of poverty. With more powers we can do even more. -Labour had told us that they will -reset devolution- but have said very little about what that would actually mean in practice. Which powers do they think Scotland is incapable of managing and why?- -The best people to make choices about the future of Scotland are the people who live here. Why should our parliament be unable to increase the wages of workers who live here? Why should we be unable to tax the wealth of the huge corporations who do business here? And why should our parliament be denied the borrowing powers that would allow us to invest in our communities and the services we all rely on?- 9:38am Rishi Sunak will warn that it would take decades to recover from the -disaster- of a Labour government as he seeks to rally Tories to fight for every vote in the closing stages of the General Election campaign. The Prime Minister will tell activists they have just 10 days to -take our message to every corner of the United Kingdom- before polls open on July 4. The Prime Minister will launch the Scottish Tory manifesto and address a campaign event in London at the start of the last full week of campaigning. His latest intervention comes with him under pressure from within the Conservative Party to take a tougher stance against those being investigated by the Gambling Commission for betting on the election date. Sunak heads to Edinburgh as Tory campaign engulfed by growing gambling scandal (Image: PA) According to extracts of his speech briefed to the Daily Mail, Mr Sunak will say: -We have 10 days to take our message to every corner of the United Kingdom. -To make the argument that this country needs lower taxes, not 2,000 more taxes for every working family. -To make the case that a Labour government would be bad for our country, and an unchecked Labour government would be a disaster from which it would take decades to recover.- 9:36am Mark Smith: Starmer is right to say No to SNP on another independence referendum 9:34am Alison Rowat: Swinney stumbles again on indyref2 question but SNP leader fights on 9:30am A Cabinet minister has said he would place bets on -individual seats- as he has done in the past if he were -allowed to bet on the election-. It comes as the Conservative party is embroiled in controversy involving allegations of insider betting on the date of the General Election before it was announced by Rishi Sunak. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris on Monday revealed how he would bet on the election if it was permitted. He told Times Radio: -If I was allowed to bet on the election, I would do what I have done in the past which is have bets on individual seats that are what you would be calling too close to call because you know I quite fancied that, like my 1 bet at the beginning of a week on the multiplier for five wins on the football at the weekend.- But Mr Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, also said he was -not really- a betting man. A Cabinet minister has said he would place bets on -individual seats- as he has done in the past if he were -allowed to bet on the election-. It comes as the Conservative party is embroiled in controversy involving allegations of insider betting on the date of the General Election before it was announced by Rishi Sunak. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris on Monday revealed how he would bet on the election if it was permitted. He told Times Radio: -If I was allowed to bet on the election, I would do what I have done in the past which is have bets on individual seats that are what you would be calling too close to call because you know I quite fancied that, like my 1 bet at the beginning of a week on the multiplier for five wins on the football at the weekend.- But Mr Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, also said he was -not really- a betting man. A Cabinet minister has said he would place bets on -individual seats- as he has done in the past if he were -allowed to bet on the election-. It comes as the Conservative party is embroiled in controversy involving allegations of insider betting on the date of the General Election before it was announced by Rishi Sunak. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris on Monday revealed how he would bet on the election if it was permitted. He told Times Radio: -If I was allowed to bet on the election, I would do what I have done in the past which is have bets on individual seats that are what you would be calling too close to call because you know I quite fancied that, like my 1 bet at the beginning of a week on the multiplier for five wins on the football at the weekend.- But Mr Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, also said he was -not really- a betting man. A Cabinet minister has said he would place bets on -individual seats- as he has done in the past if he were -allowed to bet on the election-. It comes as the Conservative party is embroiled in controversy involving allegations of insider betting on the date of the General Election before it was announced by Rishi Sunak. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris on Monday revealed how he would bet on the election if it was permitted. He told Times Radio: -If I was allowed to bet on the election, I would do what I have done in the past which is have bets on individual seats that are what you would be calling too close to call because you know I quite fancied that, like my 1 bet at the beginning of a week on the multiplier for five wins on the football at the weekend.- But Mr Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, also said he was -not really- a betting man. A Cabinet minister has said he would place bets on -individual seats- as he has done in the past if he were -allowed to bet on the election-. It comes as the Conservative party is embroiled in controversy involving allegations of insider betting on the date of the General Election before it was announced by Rishi Sunak. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris on Monday revealed how he would bet on the election if it was permitted. He told Times Radio: -If I was allowed to bet on the election, I would do what I have done in the past which is have bets on individual seats that are what you would be calling too close to call because you know I quite fancied that, like my 1 bet at the beginning of a week on the multiplier for five wins on the football at the weekend.- But Mr Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, also said he was -not really- a betting man. A Cabinet minister has said he would place bets on -individual seats- as he has done in the past if he were -allowed to bet on the election-. It comes as the Conservative party is embroiled in controversy involving allegations of insider betting on the date of the General Election before it was announced by Rishi Sunak. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris on Monday revealed how he would bet on the election if it was permitted. He told Times Radio: -If I was allowed to bet on the election, I would do what I have done in the past which is have bets on individual seats that are what you would be calling too close to call because you know I quite fancied that, like my 1 bet at the beginning of a week on the multiplier for five wins on the football at the weekend.- But Mr Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, also said he was -not really- a betting man. A Cabinet minister has said he would place bets on -individual seats- as he has done in the past if he were -allowed to bet on the election-. It comes as the Conservative party is embroiled in controversy involving allegations of insider betting on the date of the General Election before it was announced by Rishi Sunak. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris on Monday revealed how he would bet on the election if it was permitted. He told Times Radio: -If I was allowed to bet on the election, I would do what I have done in the past which is have bets on individual seats that are what you would be calling too close to call because you know I quite fancied that, like my 1 bet at the beginning of a week on the multiplier for five wins on the football at the weekend.- But Mr Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, also said he was -not really- a betting man. A Cabinet minister has said he would place bets on -individual seats- as he has done in the past if he were -allowed to bet on the election-. It comes as the Conservative party is embroiled in controversy involving allegations of insider betting on the date of the General Election before it was announced by Rishi Sunak. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris on Monday revealed how he would bet on the election if it was permitted. He told Times Radio: -If I was allowed to bet on the election, I would do what I have done in the past which is have bets on individual seats that are what you would be calling too close to call because you know I quite fancied that, like my 1 bet at the beginning of a week on the multiplier for five wins on the football at the weekend.- But Mr Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, also said he was -not really- a betting man. 9:27am What to expect on the General Election campaign trail on Monday Rishi Sunak will launch the Scottish Conservatives- manifesto as he tries, yet again, to get his election campaign back on track after another difficult weekend. The Prime Minister and Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer will face questions from Sun readers in back-to-back interviews in London, which will be aired on the newspaper-s website from 5pm. Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting will be on the campaign trail warning that people are resorting to pulling their own teeth out because of how difficult it is to see a dentist.Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting will be on the campaign trail warning that people are resorting to pulling their own teeth out because of how difficult it is to see a dentist. The Liberal Democrats are highlighting the crisis in A&E departments in hospitals across England.The Liberal Democrats are highlighting the crisis in A&E departments in hospitals across England. In an ITV interview being aired on Monday night, Nigel Farage calls for -sensible- peace talks to end the Ukraine war triggered by Vladimir Putin-s invasion.In an ITV interview being aired on Monday night, Nigel Farage calls for -sensible- peace talks to end the Ukraine war triggered by Vladimir Putin-s invasion. The Green Party is campaigning on its 20 billion-a-year plan to reform the care system.The Green Party is campaigning on its 20 billion-a-year plan to reform the care system. Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch and her Labour shadow Jonathan Reynolds will go head-to-head in a hustings organised by the Institute of Directors and Bloomberg at 12.30pm.Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch and her Labour shadow Jonathan Reynolds will go head-to-head in a hustings organised by the Institute of Directors and Bloomberg at 12.30pm. 9:24am Nigel Farage has hit back at Boris Johnson after the former prime minister accused the Reform UK leader of a -morally repugnant- repetition of Russian President Vladimir Putin-s justification for the invasion of Ukraine. Mr Farage tweeted: -Boris, you are a liar and a hypocrite. -I am glad you are no longer Prime Minister of this country.- In his post on X, he included two newspaper articles from 2016 and 2022 headlined -Boris blames EU for war in Ukraine- and -Boris Johnson blamed EU for Russia-s 2014 attacks on Ukraine and was branded -Putin apologist'-. 9:23am Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting said -biological women have felt excluded- at times in debates on transgender rights. He told Times Radio: -I think at times in pursuit of inclusion we-ve ended up in a position where women have felt excluded, biological women have felt excluded. Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting -And there are practical examples of this in terms of things like NHS language and documentation.- Asked about Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer-s position on the issue, Mr Streeting said: -I think what Keir has been trying to do on this - I think we all have - is to try and respect the fact that there are people whose gender identity is different from their biological sex and to try and be as inclusive as possible.- 9:22am The SNP has pledged to tackle the "unique challenges" faced by the Highlands such as higher living and energy costs. Deputy First Minister Kate Forbes joined candidates standing in Highland constituencies for the SNP's manifesto launch today in Merkinch, Inverness. The party vowed to prioritise local communities and "build a prosperous future for everyone in the region" while promoting Scottish independence. Deputy First Minster Kate Forbes joined SNP candidates in Inverness for the launch of the party's Highland manifesto (Image: Newsquest) Kate Forbes said: -The SNP will always put the Highlands first. Despite the pressures on our public finances during 14 years of Tory austerity, we have delivered significant improvements to health, education and the Highland economy. -We-ve built several new hospitals and new schools, created the potential for thousands of new jobs as part of the green industrial revolution and made the case for reversing depopulation. -SNP MPs at Westminster have argued for lower energy and living costs, protection for our NHS, and more capital to invest in infrastructure. -This manifesto sets out how we will continue to deliver for the Highlands.- 9:21am Brexit exposed the -myth of the union of equals,- John Swinney will say today in a speech to mark the eighth anniversary of the result of the referendum on EU membership. The First Minister, who will be speaking at an event at Robert Gordon-s University in Aberdeen, will say the fallout from the 2016 vote shows that -Scotland-s voice simply does not matter to the Westminster establishment.- But the Scottish Tories hit back at Mr Swinney, saying he never respects referendum results. Scotland voted by 68% to 32% to stay in the EU, but across the UK, 52% of voters backed leave. In his speech, the First Minister will say the Brexit result -demonstrated that the UK is not a partnership of equal nations.- Swinney: Brexit exposed 'myth of union of equals' (Image: PA) He will add: -The fact that Scotland voted to remain ultimately mattered not one jot to Westminster. -That-s not equality - it-s a -know your place- attitude. -The way Scotland is being treated over Brexit is symptomatic of a wider -Westminster knows best- union, whatever the cost to Scotland. -While yesterday was the anniversary of the Brexit vote, today is the anniversary of people in Scotland waking up to the new reality. -The reality not just that we were about to be dragged out of the EU against our will. -But the reality that Scotland-s voice simply does not matter to the Westminster establishment. -The myth of the union of equals was extinguished for so many people across Scotland on this day eight years ago.- 9:18am Activists in the local branch of one of Scottish Labour-s key election hopefuls have warned that she will -damage- the party if elected to Westminster. The extraordinary intervention from unhappy members about Kirsteen Sullivan comes less than two weeks before voters go to the polls. It also comes just days after Sir Keir Starmer and Anas Sarwar campaigned with the West Lothian councillor in the Bathgate and Linlithgow seat. West Lothian Labour activists speak out against candidate days before election (Image: Gordon Terris/H&T) The Herald has been told that the internal battle was sparked by a disagreement on how the local party should spend its funds. The Linlithgow Constituency Labour Party (CLP) had previously struggled financially but has recently built up a war chest of around 12,000. 9:17am Rishi Sunak will be in Edinburgh to launch the Scottish Conservative manifesto, but the publication of the party-s pledges looks set to be overshadowed by the growing Gambling Commission probe. Yesterday it emerged that another senior figure in the party was being investigated over bets placed on the timing of the general election. Nick Mason, the chief data officer, has taken a leave of absence. The latest allegations were published by the Sunday Times, which claimed dozens of bets had been placed with potential winnings worth thousands of pounds. Three other figures have been caught up in the scandal. Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
