   General election live: talk of Labour supermajority ‘nonsense’, says party’s Scotland leader The Guardian (London) June 23, 2024 Sunday 8:31 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:14 Length: 7460 words Byline: Yohannes Lowe Highlight: Anas Sarwar says ‘not a single vote has been cast’ after Grant Shapps said Tories fighting to prevent Labour landslide even bigger than 1997 Body   block-time published-time 3.13pm BST   Talk of Labour supermajority is 'nonsense', party's Scotland leader says   We have some more quotes from Scottish Labour leader Anas Sarwar, who has been speaking on the BBC’s Sunday Show. Earlier, he reiterated his view that it is “for the Scottish people” to decide on independence and that another referendum would require support for separation to become the “settled will” of the people (see post at 12.29  for details).  Sarwar has now described talk of a Labour “supermajority” as “nonsense”, saying that “not a single vote has been cast”.  He added:  We still don’t have end results from this election and every vote for Scottish Labour in this election is of course to make sure we get rid of the Tories, but it’s also to put Scotland at the heart of a Labour government and to deliver the change that this country needs. Earlier this month, the defence secretary, Grant Shapps, signalled a change in Tory electoral strategy  by saying the Conservatives were fighting to prevent Keir Starmer winning a “supermajority” even bigger than Labour’s 1997 landslide victory. In the face of dire polls for the party, the unusual messaging seemed to be the Tories conceding that defeat is inevitable and instead pleading with its core voters to ensure there is still a substantial group of Conservative MPs in parliament. Labour has sought to guard against complacency, with a leaked memo from campaign chief Pat McFadden – as reported by the BBC – talking up the number of undecided or uncertain voters across the UK. block-time published-time 2.59pm BST   Bookmakers asked for details of bets of £20 or more placed on election date after Sunak's announcement - Sky News    Jon Craig, Sky News’ chief political correspondent, understands that investigators have written to leading bookmakers asking for details of bets of £20 or more on the election date (4 July) within days of Rishi Sunak announcing it on 22 May.  Craig also has been told that “many more people” than the four Conservatives already identified are being investigated by the Gambling Commission in potential connection to bets placed on the date of the general election. This backs up Robert Peston’s reporting mentioned in this post.   The Sky News report reads: Many more people than the leading Tories already identified are being investigated by the gambling regulator in relation to bets on the date of the general election, Sky News understands. And in a major new development, the watchdog has widened its inquiries to investigate whether people with inside knowledge may have asked a third party to place a bet for them. Sky News also understands that investigators have written to leading bookmakers asking for details of bets of £20 or more on the election date within days of Rishi Sunak announcing it on 22 May. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.02pm BST block-time published-time 2.40pm BST   Former Tory minister is 'deeply hurt and rather angry' at betting allegations   The former justice secretary Robert Buckland has said he is “deeply hurt and rather angry” at the growing Tory betting scandal after it emerged the party’s chief data officer is being looked into by the Gambling Commission over bets allegedly placed on the date of the general election. James Mason is the fourth party figure subject to an investigation by the gambling watchdog.  “I’m deeply, deeply hurt and rather angry that this has happened in the middle of a campaign that is tough enough without things like this to complicate it further,” Buckland, the Conservative candidate for Swindon South, told LBC’s Lewis Goodall. Buckland said the prime minister, Rishi Sunak, should suspend the people involved while investigations are ongoing, and that he expects “higher standards” within the Conservative party and more broadly.  enltr"You think the Prime Minister should suspend the people involved?" "Yes I do." Tory candidate Sir Robert Buckland makes his stance clear on the election betting scandal. pic.twitter.com/fF26ya8oTP  — LBC (@LBC) June 23, 2024 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.42pm BST block-time published-time 2.04pm BST  Lib Dems candidate Daisy Cooper has arrived in Harpenden in a tractor to help with canvassing in her local area. Cooper, who is deputy leader of the party, told the crowds: This is our chance to win the change that our country desperately needs. Day in, day out, people are working incredibly hard, they’re paying their taxes and yet they’re still struggling to make ends meet. At the end of her speech, she said: Our message is clear: a vote for the Liberal Democrats is a vote for a strong local champion …. A vote for the Liberal Democrats is a vote for a fair deal and a vote for the Liberal Democrats is a vote to deliver the change this country so desperately needs. When asked about the Tory gambling scandal , Cooper told the PA news agency: “I think right across the country, people are sick to the back teeth of conservative governments in Westminster, and the SNP government in Scotland as well, being mired in scandal and sleaze.” She added:  Liberal Democrats would make sure that the ministerial code is put on an independent footing, we would make sure that there was an independent ethics adviser as well. Fundamentally, I think the first step in terms of getting rid of the sleazy scandal in public life has to be getting rid of the Conservatives and getting them out of office on the Fourth of July.” The latest Opinium poll for the Observer puts the Lib Dems at 12% (unchanged), while the Greens have enjoyed a surge and now stand at 9%. The poll gives Labour a 20-point lead over the Tories. It shows Reform only four points behind the Conservatives, on 16% of the vote. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.48pm BST block-time published-time 1.51pm BST   Douglas Ross, the leader of the Scottish Conservatives and a controversial candidate  in this election, has said he is concerned that traditional Tory voters opting for Reform could hand seats to the SNP: What [Farage] risks doing here is letting the SNP in. Because in key seats, a vote for Reform will simply let the SNP in the back door and I think people are becoming more and more aware of that, and the risk that they will wake up on 5 July with an SNP politician because Reform votes have allowed that to happen … There’s not a single opinion poll that has got the Reform party anywhere close to winning a seat anywhere in Scotland, but they can help the SNP get in. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.44pm BST block-time published-time 1.41pm BST   Stella Creasy, the Labour candidate in Walthamstow, has shared photos of her office that she says was vandalised last night. “Message to whoever attacked my office last night. You don’t intimidate me and you don’t belong in the political process,” she wrote on X. enltrMessage to whoever attacked my office last night. You don’t intimidate me and you don’t belong in the political process. Same as those circulating malicious and false leaflets. Police already on this to find you - will press for the strongest penalties for such an anti 1/2 pic.twitter.com/QfLjcohbzA  — stellacreasy (@stellacreasy) June 23, 2024 Creasy has said previously  that harassment towards political representatives was increasingly normalised. She has said the abuse she has faced as an MP, including rape and death threats, were indicative of a serious problem that risked undermining democracy. block-time published-time 1.26pm BST  John Harris writes in his column today about his mistrust of polls: Elections ought to represent potential moments of reckoning, when we all talk about the state of the country and its future, the struggles and travails people go through, and the different visions of the future they have. If the people meant to lead that conversation are hyperventilating about uniform swings, representative samples and which polling company is going to be proved right, those things get lost. There is also an even bigger risk. As the uneasy public mood proves, this is an age of profound political alienation, when nasty populists can too easily accuse the mainstream media and Westminster politicians of being part of a remote elite whose members are all the same. Because it robs politics of meaningful substance, polling hysteria gives that kind of talk the ring of truth. So does the banal framing of the election as a wholly foregone conclusion. Read more here:  Related:  I’ve seen all the ‘landslide’ polls – but they can’t tell us what’s really going on in this election | John Harris block-time published-time 1.11pm BST  Labour will create a watchdog with “real teeth” that has the power to prosecute and fine companies that breach the rights of their employees as part of its plans to strengthen workers’ rights.  Angela Rayner, the party’s deputy leader, told the Observer that she would create a new body, the Fair Work Agency, to oversee her proposals. She said that millions of workers could be losing out on basic rights as a result of underenforcement. The agency would have “real teeth”, with the power to levy fines, inspect workplaces, lodge civil proceedings and bring forward prosecutions. It would enforce rights like holiday pay, sick pay and parental rights, which Labour has pledged to strengthen. Rayner said: Under the Tories, the enforcement of workers’ rights is fragmented, overburdened and overstretched. That’s bad for workers, for businesses and for our economy. Allowing those who don’t even pay the national minimum wage off scot-free only encourages a race to the bottom. Employers who want to do right by their workers are being badly let down, finding themselves undercut by those who refuse to play by the rules.  Related:  Labour watchdog will have ‘real teeth’ to prosecute rogue employers, says Angela Rayner block-time published-time 12.48pm BST   Gambling Commission investigating 'many' other individuals who bet on general election - ITV News   The Gambling Commission is investigating “many” other individuals who bet on the July election, ITV News’ political editor, Robert Peston, said.  The Gambling Commission has informed Nick Mason, the Tories’ chief data officer, that he is part of its inquiry into bets on the timing of the election, the Sunday Times reported.  The Conservative party confirmed that Mason had taken a leave of absence. Mason is the fourth confirmed Conservative figure  to be facing an investigation in a growing gambling scandal that has engulfed the party during the election campaign. Peston wrote in a tweet on X: After the Tory candidate and ex PPS to Sunak, Craig Williams, placed a £100 bet on a July election, the booking giant Entain, owner of Ladbrokes and Corals, notified the commission.  Entain made the disclosure to the commission because Williams as an MP (before parliament was dissolved) was classified as a Politically Exposed Person in relevant law. The commission then wrote to all the gambling companies requesting details of any individual who had bet £20 or more on that July election within days of the PM calling it on 22 May. The commission then wrote to all the gambling companies requesting details of any individual who had bet £20 or more on that July election within days of the PM calling it on 22 May. This initial trawl yielded what industry sources say were “many names” and since then the commission has been combing through the internet and social media to establish who they are and whether they have links to the Conservative party or government. enltrThe Gambling Commission is investigating “many” other individuals who bet on the July election, I understand, in a widening scandal that is undermining Rishi Sunak’s general election campaign. After the Tory candidate and ex PPS to Sunak, Craig Williams, placed a £100 bet on a… — Robert Peston (@Peston) June 23, 2024 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.52pm BST block-time published-time 12.29pm BST  On the BBC’s Sunday Show, Scottish Labour leader Anas Sarwar reiterated his view that it is “for the Scottish people” to decide on independence and that another referendum would require support for separation to become the “settled will” of the people. But Sarwar – much like other politicians on both sides of the constitutional divide – refused to say what support would be required or how it could be quantified. He added:  We’ve been really clear in this election campaign. I don’t support independence, I don’t support a referendum, there isn’t a consistent majority for independence, there isn’t a majority for a referendum. The Scottish Labour manifesto largely mirrors UK Labour pledges on growing the economy, cutting NHS waiting lists and more support for young people set out by Keir Starmer. Scottish Labour is poised for huge gains north of the border at the general election, according to polls.  block-time published-time 11.59am BST  Unite’s general secretary, Sharon Graham, said she does not agree with Labour’s fiscal rules and called on the party to borrow to invest. Unite is Labour’s largest union donor but it has refused to endorse the party’s general election manifesto. Shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves has promised to retain the Tories’ commitment that debt as a proportion of GDP must be on track to fall in five years if Labour win the election on 4 July. She has ruled out borrowing to fund day-to-day spending, saying her focus will be on reforms to grow the economy. Graham has claimed other countries with growing economies have a larger debt-to-GDP ratio than the UK, “so there is wriggle room”. Graham told Sky’s Sunday Morning with Trevor Phillips programme: If you look at other countries – in France, their debt to GDP is 112%. In America, where the economy’s growing, it’s 130% debt to GDP. Ours is around about 99%. We have wriggle room. Give Britain a break. These people that are out there in communities and workers, they are literally hurting beyond anything you could comprehend and what we need is the straitjacket off a little bit, get some wriggle room there. Borrowing to invest is not the same as other borrowing. It’s borrowing to invest. It’s part of our balance sheet. Let’s get that done and if you don’t do that, we’ll be waiting too long. enltr'Are you amongst those who are a bit disappointed by Labour's lack of ambition?' @UniteSharon  says Labour needs to "loosen the straitjacket that they are talking about fiscally, and we must borrow to invest". #TrevorPhillips https://t.co/fhIHlpTGAF ?? Sky 501, Virgin 602 pic.twitter.com/j65HWXP8dY  — Sky News (@SkyNews) June 23, 2024 Relations with Unite have been strained ever since Starmer replaced Jeremy Corbyn as party leader in 2020. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.04pm BST block-time published-time 11.49am BST  Support for a united Ireland has not advanced one step in the quarter century since Northern Ireland’s peace agreement, the leader of the DUP has told the PA news agency. Some polls have suggested otherwise. A Lucid Talk/Sunday Times survey last year, for example, showed  that 57% of 18 to 24-year-olds in Northern Ireland would vote “yes” to reunifying Ireland if a border poll were held.  The Press Association has this report: However, Gavin Robinson said unionists could not be complacent about the maintenance of the Union, as he acknowledged the need to convince the growing number of non-aligned middle ground voters in Northern Ireland of the case for the constitutional status quo. In a pre-election interview with the PA news agency, Mr Robinson also dismissed suggestions his party has recently performed a U-turn on its endorsement of the UK government deal on post-Brexit trade barriers that in January persuaded the DUP to drop its two-year protest blockade on powersharing at Stormont and return to devolution. Countering the accusations of flip-flopping levelled by political rivals, he argued that the DUP had never claimed the government’s Safeguarding the Union command paper had resolved all the issues around checks and restrictions on goods moving from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. He insisted he had been consistent in characterising the deal as having made some progress to address his party’s concerns over trade and sovereignty, but that more work was still required on outstanding issues. Mr Robinson found himself unexpectedly elevated to the party leadership, initially on an interim basis, when his predecessor Sir Jeffrey Donaldson stood down in March after being charged with historical sexual offences.  Donaldson’s case is now before the courts, and he has indicated he will contest all 11 charges facing him. The barrister turned politician, who is hoping to hold off a challenge from Alliance party leader Naomi Long to retain his parliamentary seat in East Belfast, said being thrust into the leadership role in such circumstances had created a “new dynamic” in his professional and personal life. In his interview with PA, Mr Robinson offered his view on the relative strength of the union between Great Britain and Northern Ireland – given the turbulence created by Brexit and intensifying calls from within nationalism for a border poll. “The biggest threat to the Union in the last number of years has not been in Northern Ireland. It’s been outside Northern Ireland. And yet that is settled, you can see support for independence in Scotland dissipating. And, so, I think there’s a strong and positive future for the Union in 50 years and beyond,” he said. Mr Robinson added: “I don’t think there is any complacency at all, there’s always a danger if you were to take your eye off the ball, but that’s not what we present. “I think there’s obviously a difference between political unionism and those who are pro-Union, there is a difference with that. And there’s a burgeoning centre that don’t think every day about the constitutional question but are pleased and content to be in the Union, recognise that the Union works for them and though the last number of years have been politically fractious for a whole host of reasons, that’s not our focus – our focus is about making sure that day and daily we can highlight the benefits of being in the United Kingdom and strengthen and grow these bonds.” block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.20pm BST block-time published-time 11.34am BST   Tory MPs paid £100,000 of public funds to party’s in-house web designers   Jessica Elgot is the Guardian’s deputy political editor More than 120 Conservative MPs, including Jeremy Hunt, Liz Truss, Sajid Javid and Gillian Keegan , paid £100,000 of taxpayers’ money to the Conservatives’ in-house web design services, it can be revealed. The MPs used the Bluetree website service to design their websites. When billed by Bluetree, they would pay for the sites then claim back the costs from the public purse via expenses, prompting a complaint to parliament’s expenses watchdog about the practice. Conservative Campaign Headquarters (CCHQ) has denied Bluetree is wholly owned by the party and says it is a separate organisation, but repeatedly refused to deny the party receives income from the company, saying it has “commercial arrangements with CCHQ”. Records show more than 330 invoices from Bluetree to Conservative MPs, including Hunt, Truss, Javid and Keegan, for web design services. Other high-profile Conservatives  who have expensed services from Bluetree include Ben Wallace, Tobias Ellwood, Mark Francois and Helen Whately. block-time published-time 11.30am BST  Plaid Cymru’s manifesto says Brexit was a “failure” and that it is in Wales’ best interest to rejoin the EU “at an appropriate point in time”. In a post on X published this morning, the party said that Wales has been “shortchanged” by the Conservatives on post-Brexit funding, as it lists negative consequences of leaving the bloc, including higher charges for businesses and essential household items.  Despite being one of the biggest beneficiaries of EU funding, Wales voted leave by a majority of 52% to 48% in the 2016 referendum. enltr8 years on, and both Labour and Tories are deadly silent on the damage Brexit has caused: ?? Higher costs of household essentials. ?? Red tape and high charges for businesses ?? Farmers undermined by post-Brexit trade deals allowing cheap imports to come to Wales. ?? Freedom of… — Plaid Cymru ?????????????? (@Plaid_Cymru) June 23, 2024 Plaid Cymru, led by Rhun ap Iorwerth, held four seats in Westminster in the last parliament and polling suggests it will take two or three seats on 4 July amid troubles for Welsh Labour in the Senedd after a vote of no confidence in the first minister , Vaughan Gething.  block-time published-time 11.12am BST  Libby Brooksis the Guardian’s Scotland correspondent  John Swinney ’s first appearance on the Laura Kuenssberg Show as SNP leader was not a comfortable one. With the front pages in Scotland this morning suggesting that his own office manager was involved in the growing row over misuse of MSPs expenses to buy stamps for general election leafletting, Swinney was forced to assure Kuenssberg that he was completely confidence that his party was not using any public money for general election campaigning. The SNP is being investigated by Holyrood authorities over potential misuse of MSPs’ expenses, after an anonymous complaint was sent last week to the Scottish parliament’s presiding officer, Alison Johnstone, claiming that stamps paid for on expenses were passed to Westminster election candidates to use for posting leaflets to voters. Dismissing a reference to the “stamp fairy” apparently made by one of his staff as a “humorous remark on a WhatsApp channel”, Swinney’s discomfort with these allegations are twofold. Firstly, they feed into wider voter distrust of the party, particularly around financial transparency, with the ongoing police investigation into alleged embezzlement of party funds and the row over the £11,000 iPad bill racked up by former health secretary Michael Matheson.  Secondly, it highlights how skint the party is currently. With falling membership and donations, it’s entirely plausible that staff could be scrabbling around for the price of a stamp. But even more striking was the fact that the rest of the interview focused almost entirely on Swinney’s latest iteration of the SNP independence strategy , which seems to be that even if the party fails to secure a majority of Westminster seats at this election it still has a mandate to push for a second referendum because a pro-independence majority was voted in at Holyrood in 2021. But SNP MPs have been talking for some time now about how voters feel the party has been too distracted by referendum process and insufficiently focused on their more immediate cost of living concerns. The SNP were punished for exactly that last autumn’s Rutherglen byelection. So is it really wise to return to this un-square-able circle (Labour continue to refuse any talks on a referendum) so late in the campaign? block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.14am BST block-time published-time 11.04am BST   Sunak claims Starmer tried to 'reverse' the EU referendum vote    Rishi Sunak has attacked Keir Starmer over Brexit on the eighth anniversary of the vote to leave the EU. The prime minister wrote on X that the Labour party leader tried to “reverse” the referendum vote, while the Conservatives “delivered on the will of the people”. Starmer has insisted that while he wants a better trading relationship with the EU, Labour would not rejoin the bloc, the single market or the customs union if it comes to power next month. enltr8 years ago today, I proudly voted for Brexit. While we delivered on the will of the people, Keir Starmer tried to reverse your vote. That’s the difference between us. — Rishi Sunak (@RishiSunak) June 23, 2024 “We’re not rejoining the EU, we’re not rejoining the single market or the customs union,” Starmer told reporters on Saturday. “That isn’t our plan. It never has been. I’ve never said that as leader of the Labour party, and it’s not in our manifesto.” He was speaking at a campaign event in Vauxhall, south London, after Kemi Badenoch , the business secretary, who is seen as a likely Tory leadership contender, claimed he would reverse Brexit if he won power. Labour’s manifesto – titled “It’s time for real change” – mentioned the word Brexit just once, compared with 21 times at the last election. Starmer, who voted to remain in the EU, felt so strongly about the Brexit referendum result in June 2016 that he quit as a junior shadow minister under Jeremy Corbyn.  A few months later he returned to the Labour frontbench as shadow Brexit  secretary and spent the next four years campaigning to mitigate the result. He campaigned against a no-deal Brexit and for a second referendum to give the people a “confirmatory vote” on any deal with Brussels. You can read more about Starmer’s positions on Brexit here.  block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.23am BST block-time published-time 10.53am BST   Success for the SNP in the election would be 'becoming the largest party in Scotland', Swinney says   Scottish first minister John Swinney has been speaking to LBC. He said he would define success for the SNP in the general election as “becoming the largest party in Scotland”. The SNP’s long-held policy – agreed at its conference last year – is that a majority of seats would be a mandate to begin negotiations with the UK government for another independence referendum. It is possible for the SNP to be the largest party in Scotland but not have a majority of the 57 seats. Swinney told LBC: Becoming the largest party in Scotland, that would be my objective in this election. And that would be the largest party in terms of seats. Swinney added that a message that “differentiates” it from the others running in this election by focus on austerity and the “huge damage of Brexit”. After a huge swing to Labour in the past 18 months, the SNP is teetering on the brink.  As Robert Ford, professor of political science at Manchester University, wrote in this analysis piece for the Observer , tiny local or national tremors in the final weeks will determine the fate of dozens of SNP MPs. block-time published-time 10.35am BST  The SNP leader John Swinney said at the manifesto launch that a win in Scotland  for his party would be a mandate to push for a second vote. The Labour party leader, Keir Starmer, widely expected to become the prime minister after 4 July, said categorically last week that he would refuse to participate in negotiations for another independence referendum even if the SNP won a majority of seats. On her Sunday programme, Laura Kuenssberg asked Swinney if voters can trust the SNP’s manifesto even though the Tories and Labour have both said they would not grant a second independence referendum vote. The Scottish first minister said: So what I am saying in this election is that if people in Scotland want to be an independent country, then they’ve got to support the Scottish National Party as the only means of ensuring that can come about and we cannot allow the westminster political parties to deny the people of Scotland their democratic rights and the democratic opportunity to decide their own constitutional future. Because I think it’s an essential solution to the issues that people face in their lives today. If you look at the challenges of public spending cuts, which you’ve talked about in this programme, the devastating effects of Brexit on our country and our economy, and the impact of the cost of living these are all issues that have been delivered by westminster. These are all problems created by westminster decision making, or forcing yourself as the European Union against the will of people in Scotland. And then the prolonging of public spending cuts which is what the Labour party will do when they come to office. Now, my answer to that is to make sure that decisions about the future of Scotland are made in Scotland, for Scotland. And that can only come about if people are prepared to vote for that in the forthcoming general election. Swinney added that he won’t pre-judge the outcome of the election when asked what he would do if his party fails to get a majority of seats. The Scottish first minister points out the SNP won a majority in Holyrood in 2021 on a pro-independence platform, saying that mandate “has to be delivered”. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.38am BST block-time published-time 10.16am BST   Scotland's first minister 'assured' by his staff that no stamps bought on Holyrood expenses were used for party campaigning   The SNP is being investigated by Holyrood authorities over potential misuse of MSPs’ expenses to fund campaigning for the general election. The Mail on Sunday obtained messages  that suggested the SNP leader John Swinney’s office manager was involved in discussions about the use of stamps allegedly paid for by taxpayers. In one WhatsApp message sent to an SNP group chat, the Scottish first minister’s assistant reportedly wrote: ‘The stamp fairy is very useful when it comes to campaigns!” Swinney told the BBC’s Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg programme: Well, I’ve obviously discussed this with my staff. I’ve been assured that no parliamentary stamps that have been provided by parliament have been used to support election purposes. And it obviously the parliament has said that they’re looking into this matter, and obviously we will provide parliament with any assistance they require as they undertake those inquiries. When pressed on specifically who the “stamp fairy” is, he added: We campaign on a regular basis in my capacity as a member of parliament. So we’re engaging with the public on a countless range of different issues. So I think these are sort of humorous remarks made in a WhatsApp channel. And what’s important is the reassurance that I’ve had that parliamentary stamps have not been used for election purposes. The SNP investigation comes as the party struggles to raise funds, with falling membership hitting party income and larger donations ebbing away amid the police investigation  into alleged embezzlement of party funds. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.18am BST block-time published-time 9.58am BST   Lib Dems call on Sunak to suspend all those under investigation in 'all-out' election gambling scandal   The Liberal Democrats have said that Rishi Sunak should “personally intervene” in the “all-out” gambling scandal and suspend all those under investigation by the Gambling Commission for allegedly placing bets on the general election date. The party’s deputy leader, Daisy Cooper, said: This is now an all-out scandal at the heart of Rishi Sunak’s Conservative party. Sunak must personally intervene to order a Cabinet Office inquiry and suspend all those under investigation by the Gambling Commission. People are sick and tired of this sleaze. Day by day, hour by hour, the Conservative government mire themselves in more of it. From the mini budget to the crisis in our NHS, the Conservatives have bet against Britain. Now, people are voting for the Liberal Democrats to deliver the change our country desperately needs. Her comments come after the Sunday Times reported  that a fourth Conservative is reportedly being looked into by the Gambling Commission over bets allegedly placed on the date of the general election. Shadow education secretary Bridget Phillipson told the BBC on Sunday that there is “genuine disgust” among voters over the general election betting allegations. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.40am BST block-time published-time 9.41am BST   Conservatives 'cynically' pursuing a 'voter suppression strategy', shadow education secretary says    Bridget Phillipson said a Labour victory is “not a done deal” as she accused the Conservatives of pursuing a “voter suppression” strategy. The shadow education secretary told Sunday Morning with Trevor Phillips on Sky News: People shouldn’t look at the polls and think this is a done deal. If people want change, if they want to turn the corner on 14 years of failure, then they’ve got to get out and vote Labour on 4 July … I’ve been across the country, there’s a lot of people that have still not made up their minds in this election and in those seats a couple of hundred votes will be the difference between a Labour government or five more years of the Conservatives. What the Tories are doing – very, very cynically – is a voter suppression strategy. They want people to think this is all in the bag, don’t worry about it, you don’t need to come out and vote. Worse than that, I think it’s an attempt to distract from their manifesto, which if they got the chance to implement that would crash the economy just like Liz Truss did. enltr“Are you worried you’re not going to win?” Labour's @bphillipsonMP  tells @TrevorPTweets  she’s talked to a lot of people who are still undecided on who they will vote for in the #GeneralElection2024 #TrevorPhillips https://t.co/fhIHlpTGAF ?? Sky 501, Virgin 602, Freeview 233 pic.twitter.com/J3mgLxPmba  — Sky News (@SkyNews) June 23, 2024 Her comments come after the latest Opinium poll  for the Observer puts Labour on 40% (unchanged compared with a week ago), with the Tories languishing on just 20% (down three on the week). The 20-point figure equals the highest Labour lead under Keir Starmer  other than during the catastrophic and short-lived premiership of Liz Truss. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.42am BST block-time published-time 9.35am BST   Shadow education secretary says she wishes she could 'wave a magic wand' and commit to more policies   Shadow education secretary Bridget Phillipson has been asked about the two-child cap, which restricts child tax credit and universal credit to the first two children in most households. Labour’s manifesto for government, included the promise of an “ambitious strategy to reduce child poverty”, but no mention of the controversial two-child limit. Q: You could, for example, choose to unfreeze fuel duty and that would provide you with the £3bn/3.5bn you would need to lift the two child cap. You have actually made a choice: you are going to keep motorists where they are and help them out, but not help families with more than two children. Phillipson responded by saying she wishes that Labour could “wave a magic wand” and “right every wrong” of the last 14 years, but that this is not possible within the financial constraints an incoming Labour government would be tied to if elected. She told Sky News: This was a conservative policy that we did not support. But I cannot sit here today and say to you, we can fix every problem or we can make commitments in every area. Because stability in the economy is important and it is working families – including those who are currently experiencing poverty – who are paying evermore when you’ve got a government that plays fast and loose with the public finances. We need to return stability to the economy. But absolutely, a Labour government will put right at its heart the need to tackle and bear down on those numbers when it comes to child poverty. I see it every day in my community. I know the impact it has. I wish that we could commit to more but it’s just not possible. And we have to be upfront with the British people about the tough choices that we will face after 14 years of failure. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.48am BST block-time published-time 9.22am BST  The home secretary, James Cleverly, said that the Reform party leader, Nigel Farage, has repeatedly said his motivation is “complete toxicity towards the Conservative party”. He told Trevor Phillips on Sky News that he can’t see Farage in the future of the Tory party as things stand. He talked about his pride in his former role as foreign secretary in supporting Ukraine defend itself against the full-scale invasion launched by Russia in February 2022. He was speaking after Farage’s comments  made in a BBC Panorama interview on Friday, in which he said that the west “provoked” Moscow into invading Ukraine through Nato and EU expansion eastward. “When we see comments coming out of that party which are echoing Putin’s lines, saying that Churchill should have appeased Hitler, I cannot envisage how attitudes like that have any home in the Conservative party now or in the future.” “The things that he and others have said – both about the conservative party and about world affairs – means I cannot see how it can be a natural home in the Conservative party.” enltr'Does Nigel Farage have a part to play in the future of the Conservative Party?' - @TrevorPTweets 'The short answer is no I can't' says Home Secretary @JamesCleverly.  #TrevorPhillips https://t.co/fhIHlpTGAF ?? Sky 501, Virgin 602, Freeview 233 and YouTube pic.twitter.com/VS0QHpiudP  — Sky News (@SkyNews) June 23, 2024 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.47am BST block-time published-time 9.10am BST   Cleverly says he has 'no reason to believe' cabinet ministers placed bets on election date    James Cleverly said he has “no reason to believe” that any cabinet ministers had bet on the election date. “I am not in any way going to defend people that placed bets on that,” the home secretary told Sky News. “There is an investigation by the Gambling Commission, and we have been told very, very clearly that we are not to discuss the investigations.” He said he believes only a “small number of individuals” are involved. enltr'I have no reason to believe any cabinet ministers placed bets on election date' Sky's @TrevorPTweets  questions Home Secretary @JamesCleverly  about the alleged Tory betting scandal. #TrevorPhillips https://t.co/fhIHlpTGAF ?? Sky 501, Virgin 602, Freeview 233 and YouTube pic.twitter.com/DqcNCStvVP  — Sky News (@SkyNews) June 23, 2024 Cleverly’s comments come after the Conservative party’s chief data officer, Nick Mason, took a leave of absence amid claims he placed bets on the timing of the general election. Mason is the fourth Conservative reportedly being looked into over allegedly betting on the timing of the general election. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.05pm BST block-time published-time 8.58am BST   Aide described Rwanda scheme as 'crap' for 'dramatic effect', home secretary says   The home secretary, James Cleverly, who is the candidate for Braintree, is being interviewed on Sky News’ Sunday Morning with Trevor Phillips programme.  He was asked about reports that James Sunderland, a Tory parliamentary candidate and aide to Cleverly, described the government’s Rwanda scheme as “crap” at a private event in April. The BBC broke the story  after being passed the recording of the event. Cleverly said: So, I saw that headline and i was quite surprised because i know James has been very supportive both of me personally and of the policy.  Of course I have had a conversation with him and I have also heard the recording. And it is clear what he is doing. He is putting forward a very counterintuitive statement to grab the attention of the audience … If you actually listen to what he then went on to say, he was saying that the impact, the effect is what matters. He went on to say that the deterrent effect we have seen working in Australia, which has an analogous policy.  He also said that when the first flights take off it will send a shock wave (his words), a shock wave across the channel, setting a very very clear message to the people smugglers and the people putting themselves in the hand of people smugglers. “He did it clearly for dramatic effect, to grab the attention of the audience,” Cleverly added, insisting Sunderland is supportive of the government’s flagship Rwanda policy. enltr"I saw that headline and I was quite surprised because I know James had been very supportive, both of me personally and of the policy.” Home Secretary @JamesCleverly  reacts to his former aide, James Sunderland, saying the Rwanda plan is “crap”. https://t.co/2nFABNIWO1 Sky 501 pic.twitter.com/dsiFU3p8VW  — Sky News (@SkyNews) June 23, 2024 The Rwanda scheme  involves sending some asylum seekers who arrive in the UK via irregular routes, including small boat crossings via the Channel, to the east African country. People sent to Rwanda  will have their asylum claims processed there and, if successful, granted refugee status in the country. If unsuccessful, they could seek asylum in another “safe third country” or apply to settle in Rwanda on other grounds. The controversial five-year deal was initially introduced under the former home secretary, Priti Patel, in 2022 to tackle the growing numbers of people crossing the Channel in small boats. However, it has faced several legal challenges, which have prevented flights from taking off to Kigali. block-time published-time 8.39am BST   Betting scandal as bad for Tories as Partygate, says Michael Gove   As we mentioned in the opening summary, the housing secretary, Michael Gove, has told the Sunday Times that the election betting row is as damaging to the Conservatives as the Partygate scandal. Here are some more of his quotes given to the paper: Gove said  :  It looks like one rule for them and one rule for us. That’s the most potentially damaging thing. The perception that we operate outside the rules that we set for others. That was damaging at the time of Partygate  and is damaging here … If you’re in a privileged position [close] to the prime minister at the heart of a political operation and you use inside information to make additional money for yourself, that’s just not acceptable … You are, in effect, securing an advantage against other people who are betting entirely fairly and without that knowledge. So, if these allegations are true, it’s very difficult to defend. Gove accused those involved of “sucking the oxygen out of the campaign”, saying that, just as with Partygate, “a few individuals end up creating an incredibly damaging atmosphere for the party”. The incident does not reflect on the conduct of the majority of Tory supporters who are selling the party’s “big arguments” on the doorstep, he said. “So it’s both bad in itself, but also destructive to the efforts of all of those good people who are currently fighting hard for the Conservative vote.” You can read this useful explainer about the UK election betting scandal here.   block-time published-time 8.31am BST   Opening summary   Good morning, and welcome to our continued coverage of the 2024 general election campaign. Late on Saturday, the Sunday Times reported  the Conservative party’s chief data officer, Nick Mason, had taken a leave of absence amid claims he was among those who placed bets on the timing of the election. Each of his bets was worth less than £100, but together the winnings would have amounted to thousands of pounds, according to the paper. A spokesperson for Mason told the newspaper that it would be inappropriate to comment during an investigation but he denies wrongdoing. Mason is the fourth Conservative reportedly being looked into by the Gambling Commission over bets allegedly placed on the date of the general election. Michael Gove, the housing secretary, has condemned the latest reports, and likened the controversy to Partygate. “It looks like one rule for them and one rule for us,” he told the Sunday Times, adding: “That’s the most potentially damaging thing.” Gove went on to suggest it was “just not acceptable” for those in a “privileged position” close to the prime minister to use what he described as “inside information to make additional money for yourself”. The betting scandal began with revelations in the Guardian  about a wager placed by one of Sunak’s political aides, Craig Williams. It is the last thing Rishi Sunak needs, with his party on track for heavy losses on 4 July; some polls suggest up to half of the cabinet, including the prime minister himself, are at risk of losing their seats. The latest Opinium poll for the Observer   puts Labour on 40% (unchanged compared with a week ago), with the Tories languishing on just 20% (down three on the week). Here is some of what to expect on the campaign trail today: Home secretary James Cleverly, shadow education secretary Bridget Phillipson and SNP leader John Swinney will be among those being interviewed by broadcasters this morning.Rishi Sunak will be campaigning in North Yorkshire on Sunday, ahead of gearing up for the final two weeks on the election trail.The Lib Dem deputy leader Daisy Cooper, who is also the Lib Dem health spokesperson, will be campaigning in the home counties to spread the message on improving ambulance response times to emergency callouts.Leaders from Northern Ireland’s political parties will take part in a UTV debate.Scottish Conservative leader Douglas Ross will be on the campaign trail in the Aberdeenshire North and Moray East constituency. It is Yohannes Lowe here for the next couple of hours. If you want to get my attention then please do email me on yohannes.lowe@theguardian.com block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.33am BST Load-Date: June 23, 2024  End of Document
