   Heseltine hits out at 'dishonest' election The Western Mail May 28, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 1,6 Length: 726 words Byline: CORMAC PEARSON Body   TORY grandee Michael Heseltine has warned that the General Election campaign will be the "most dishonest in modern time" because both parties refuse to debate the consequences of Brexit. Swansea-born Lord Michael Heseltine, deputy prime minister from 1995 until 1997 and a key figure in Margaret Thatcher's Cabinet, fell out with the Conservative Party during the Brexit debate because he wanted to remain in the European Union. His comments came as Plaid Cymru claimed Brexit is "wrecking" the economy. The political veteran, writing in the Independent, said: "We are now at the start of what I foresee will be the most dishonest election of modern times. "The state of our economy, defence and environment, the need to level up our society, control immigration and restore Britain's standing in the world. "None of these issues can be honestly addressed in isolation from our relationship with Europe. Yet Europe is the no-go area. "Why cannot the two major parties debate immigration in the round? The boats contain just 5% of those who might or might not be sent to Rwanda. "They are a small part of the near- 700,000 net immigration figure - the real elephant in the room." He said Britain needs to work more closely with its "European neighbours, who share our experiences". "Until we consider the consequences for our farms, care homes, hospitals and universities of culling the numbers, all the talk of change, the constant assertion of 'plans' amount to little more than platitudes blowing in the wind." He added that Britain may not be able to rely on Nato if former US president Donald Trump is elected, thus needing a closer defence relationship with Europe. His comments coincided with a call by Plaid Cymru Westminster leader Liz Saville Roberts for the UK to rejoin the single market and customs union. The MP for Dwyfor Meirionnydd said there is "clear and growing public support for closer ties with the EU" but criticised Labour and the Tories for Brexit is wrecking economy - Plaid » from front page their silence on the matter. Plaid cited a recent report by Cambridge Econometrics, and commissioned by the London Assembly, which calculated that the average UK resident was nearly £2,000 worse off in 2023 because of Brexit. Ms Saville Roberts yesterday said: ""his election is about one thing: the economy. And we need to face a hard truth - Brexit is wrecking it. "the average UK resident was nearly £2,000 worse off in 2023 as a result of Brexit. It beggars belief that a crucial election will ignore that reality. ""here is a clear and growing public support for closer ties with the EU, but both Conservatives and Labour are joined in a complicity of silence. - Plaid Cymru isn't scared of telling it as it is. The evidence is clear: Brexit isn't working. It has caused inflation to skyrocket, import costs to surge, and critical sectors like the NHS, hospitality, and tourism to suffer severe worker shortages." She said her party would "push to rejoin the single market and customs union, reviving our economy and putting money back in Welsh pockets", and added: "Plaid Cymru believes EU membership was - and remains - in the best interest of Wales. But this isn't about re-running the Brexit referendum - it's about undoing economic damage and securing a prosperous future. That's why we must urgently reenter the single market and customs union." Neil Alcock, managing director at Seiont Nurseries, near Caernarfon, which was the scene of a Plaid Cymru campaign visit yesterday, said: "Pulling out of our biggest export market was one of the most self-destructive decisions made by the Tories in Westminster. Our sales in Wales are thriving, but Brexit has made exports to Ireland - our nearest neighbours - nearly impossible. ""he introduction of the fivetimes-delayed border control for imports will lead to additional costs, some of which are still unknown. ""his is causing delays and trucks that are standing still, which costs us money. The upcoming 12 months are set to be very challenging for businesses like ours. ""his election is all about the economy, but both Labour and the Tories are blind to the impact of Brexit on businesses. "I'm glad that Liz Saville Roberts and Plaid Cymru are speaking on behalf of businesses like ours and taking a pragmatic view. Rejoining the single market is the common-sense approach and in all our interests." Load-Date: May 28, 2024  End of Document
