   How will candidates help local businesses? Moray Chamber of Commerce hustings in Elgin, amid battle for Moray West, Nairn and Strathspey seat in General Election Northern Scot June 27, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 Highland News and Media Ltd.  All Rights Reserved  Section: UK POLITICS NEWS & EUROPEAN UNION NEWS Length: 2688 words Byline: lewis.mcblane@hnmedia.co.uk,  (Lewis McBlane) Body   CANDIDATES for Moray West, Nairn and Strathspey received a grilling from Moray's business community at an Elgin hustings ahead of next week's General Election. Six out of seven candidates for the new constituency, which runs from Mosstodloch to Dalwhinnie, attended the event hosted by Moray Chamber of Commerce at UHI Moray on June 18. Chamber members asked the panel six questions, addressing vital topics like housing, childcare, staff costs, oil and gas and supporting local retail. Attending the hustings were, in alphabetical order: Liberal Democrat Neil Alexander; Labour hopeful James Hynam; SNP candidate Councillor Graham Leadbitter; Euan Morrice from the Scottish Family Party; Scottish Conservative candidate Councillor Kathleen Robertson and Councillor Draeyk van der Horn for the Scottish Green Party. The Reform Party candidate for Moray West, Nairn and Strathspey Steve Skerrett did not attend. Moray Chamber of Commerce CEO Sarah Medcraf thanked the election hopefuls for their time, and said their engagement was "a testament to the vibrant community spirit that we often talk about, and are so proud of, in Moray". Questions came from leading Moray business figures, from firms including AJ Engineering in Forres, Harper Macleod in Elgin, Lossiemouth's Stotfield Hotel, Pozzi's newsagents in Buckie and housebuilder Springfield Properties. Liberal Democrat Neil Alexander pledged to "put local businesses first", and said that building more homes in Moray was vital. He also advocated giving local councils the power to set their own business rates, and said the UK should rejoin the European Single Market. Mr Hynam said UK Energy, Labour's planned "clean energy company" to be based in Aberdeen, would lead to investment in housing and training in the area. The healthcare worker also argued that immigration rules should be loosened to reinforce local health and social care services with staff from abroad. He added: "From the experience I have in the community, I have seen the level of deprivation grow and grow and grow." Councillor Graham Leadbitter (Elgin South, SNP), argued that he would always act in Scotland's best interest as an MP, unlike members of UK-wide parties. Blaming the Conservative government for the cost of living crisis, he defended the SNP's record in office and said he would work to ensure Holyrood had enough money to tackle difficult problems such as housing and childcare. He also argued that the transition away from oil and gas must not repeat mistakes learned during the demise of the mining and steel industries. The Scottish Family Party's Euan Morrice, a farmer and accountant from Maggieknockater, singled out "family breakup" as his party's key issue and backed a transferrable marriage tax allowance. He also pushed for alcohol duty to be slashed to boost the whisky industry, along with a "cautious" approach to oil and gas. Mr Morrice also criticised current childcare policies focused on "getting parents away from their kids as soon as possible" meant that: "We are basically saying that the state can offer better childcare than you can." Conservative candidate Councillor Kathleen Robertson (Forres) drew on her 30-year experience as a veterinary surgeon and argued this gave her an insight into local businesses. Local firms face large amounts of red tape and high costs, she added, and promoted her party's bid to cut National Insurance by eight per cent and increase defence spending. She also emphasised the need to complete the dualling of the A9 and the A96 and supported cutting VAT on tourism and hospitality. Councillor Draeyk van der Horn (Forres, Green), also drew on his own business experience, and argued that a "wellbeing economy" and a "worker-led just transition" held the answer to many of the area's problems. He said there should be more focus on rail infrastructure, a higher minimum wage and a faster transition away from oil and gas through a Green Jobs Fund and Green Manufacturing Centre. Cllr van der Horn also advocated for a closer relationship with the EU, with a view to re-joining. What did businesspeople ask - and what did candidates say? Question 1 - Making the best of economic opportunities In the first question of the hustings, Graham Alexander, general manager and director at Forres firm AJ Engineering pushed candidates on how they would make the most of opportunities like the Inverness and Cromarty Firth Freeport, by improving "training, upskilling, housing and child care provision". All six candidates agreed that more had to be done moving forwards. Labour candidate Mr Hynam said his party's GB Energy, a publicly-owned "clean power company" to be based in Aberdeen, would boost the local economy. While Cllr Leadbitter (SNP) said it was important that moving away from oil and gas avoided de-industrialisation caused in other areas by collapsed mining and steel industries. He added that, despite MPs not voting on Scotland's devolved housing and childcare sectors, he would fight for more cash to go to the Scottish Parliament to ease issues. Scottish Family Party candidate Ewan Morrice, a farmer and accountant from the Maggieknockater area, said he agreed with calls to improve the number of local training and apprenticeship opportunities and pushed for "a cautious approach to just transition". Cllr Robertson, the Scottish Conservative and Unionist candidate, said that, to make the most of economic opportunities, " the A9 and A96 need dualled to support the free movement of goods". She also described the shortage of childcare as a "massive blow" to attracting new talent, and supported her party's pledge to reduce National Insurance by eight pence. Draeyk van der Horn (Green) also backed the Green Freeport, but shared his concern that this "sucking up all the attention, at the expense of other areas". Mr van der Horn said his party wanted to see a "wellbeing economy" and a "worker-led just transition". He added: "On infrastructure, we have heard about improvements to road infrastructure, but I would like to highlight that what is missing is rail infrastructure." Liberal Democrat candidate Neil Alexander emphasised the importance of building more homes in Moray and the Highlands, and said the A96 and A9 had been "completely abandoned by two governments that don't work together to get it done". Question 2 - What's the biggest issue facing the area, and what difference will you make from Westminster? The second question came from Laura McLean, from Harper Macleod, who asked what the most pressing issue facing Moray was - and how they would impact it from Westminster. Both Cllr Leadbitter said he would work to get more cash for the Scottish Parliament, to be spent on important local issues like housing, health and social care. Scottish Family Party candidate Mr Morrice pushed for alcohol duty to be slashed, as a measure to benefit the whisky industry. Current Moray Council leader Cllr Kathleen Robertson backed her party's cuts to National Insurance and toughening benefits sanctions as measures to benefit local people. Cllr van der Horn said he would look to reassess the Barnett Formula by which the Scottish Parliament is funded, to lower the voting age and give young people more say over their education. Liberal Democrat Mr Alexander supported tackling the capital gains tax "loophole" to raise more cash, along with advocating for more funding from Westminster. Mr Hynam, the Labour candidate, advocated changing immigration rules to allow international workers to work in the local health and social care sector. Question 3 - Treating business better Malcolm Edwards, from Lossiemouth's Stotfield Hotel, asked what each candidate would do to make Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) feel "valued again" and to be "able to prosper". Mr Morrice said he would cut red tape and reduce business rates, describing Elgin High Street as "an absolute state". Cllr Robertson agreed that "we need to make sure the burden is less" on SMEs, and said she opposed schemes like the Scottish Government's short-term lets licensing rules. She also pledged her support for cutting VAT on tourism and hospitality from the current 20 per cent. Cllr van der Horn pointed at his own business experience and said he will shortly be opening a gallery in Forres, adding "we absolutely need to tackle paperwork". He also added that his party planned to make changes to encourage people under 30 to start businesses. Game designer Mr Alexander pledged to give local councils the power to set their own business rates, to tackle currently-unaffordable overheads, and to consider how to get more "modern industries" into Moray and the Highlands. While healthcare worker Mr Hynam focused on "cutting red tape" and said High Street businesses "just can't make a living". He added: "There just isn't the footfall that there used to be." Cllr Leadbitter (SNP) said the SNP had the most generous business rates relief scheme in the UK, advocating for a "more level playing field with the online retailers". Question 4 - Local firms under pressure The fourth question came from David Robertson, from Pozzi's newsagents in Buckie, who asked whether candidates had ever employed people and understood the pressure caused by minimum wage rises, maternity leave and sick pay. "Labour, SNP, Lib Dems and the Greens have all spoken about further large increases and changes to minimum wage, SSP and parental pay," Mr Robertson said. "Every business I know wants to pay staff more and to reward and keep valuable team members. "But with the current true cost of £11.44 an hour somewhere around £15.40, with pension, Paye, holiday pay and more, how on earth can small businesses up and down the country afford this, when the cost of it cannot be passed onto an already struggling retail customer?" The Buckie businessman also asked how many of the candidates had personal experience of what it was like to employ staff. Several candidates, including Cllr Robertson, Cllr van der Horn and Mr Morrice said they had employed staff, though all six said they understood the pressures facing businesses. Support for the national living wage was universal, though tempered with pledges that it should become more affordable for businesses. Cllr Robertson said: "At the moment, we are expected to pick up the government's costs. "I'm not decrying the minimum wage, but we don't get any support. "I think there has to be careful consideration about how that is supported." Cllr van Der Horn said: "I have certainly been in this place, in many businesses, where I am fretting about how I am going to balance the books. "In this current position, we have to make some very different decisions, because you can't pass everything on the customer." He added that wages have been too low for a long time and suggested Universal Basic Income as a way to reduce pressure on employers. Mr Alexander said: "I support the real living wage, and I also support raising minimum wage right now. His party's pledges would mean "bringing down costs for family businesses", he claimed. He added: "We need to get into the Single Market, because at the moment it is absolutely decimating us being outside it." Mr Hynam, responding to the question, said: "I'm going to be honest with you, I have worked my entire career in the public sector. "This is why people like you coming to me is very good, as I can see a different angle. "Certain industries can afford to make the jump and perhaps they should be taxed more." Cllr Leadbitter said: "Fundamentally, when you are in a situation that means they cannot pay their bills even with top up benefits, there is something wrong with the system. "If you get the real living wage right, it reduces welfare and as soon as we strart raising wages up people have more money in their pockets. "But it has to be done at a pace that works, clearly, but we have to catch up." Mr Morrice argued that everything comes back to tax, and there are too many costs to employing staff. "It's far too complicated for the average person," he said. "And with businesses like yourself that employ folk, it's gobbledygook. "Within the family, we have tried to steer clear of employees for good reason, we stick to contractors." Question 5 - Staff shortages and Brexit Sandy Adam, long-time boss of Moray housebuilder Springfield Properties, said businesses are struggling to find new employees and argued the problem has worsened since Brexit. He said: "When I talk to other businesses in the area, one of the big problems they come across is the lack of people in the area that are available for employment. "This has been exacerbated by Brexit a few years ago." Imports and exports have also been made harder as a result of Brexit, he added. Cllr van der Horn said his party would negotiate a new relationship with the EU, to help ease the increased cost of imports and exports to the continent. He added: "Also one of those increased costs is to do with climate change. Construction materials cost more because of climate changing seasons. "One of the best things to do is to rejoin the EU and, until we do, to build a new relationship." Mr Alexander said the "really simple" solution was to rejoin the Single Market. This, he argued, was essential to "rebuild that broken relationship with Europe". He also claimed that the "promises of Brexit were a complete lie". Mr Hynam argued that the UK needed to move in a new direction in its relationship with the EU, currently preventing workers from abroad coming to boost the local economy. "I think, in general, we need an entire reset to our treaties with the EU and immigration policy. "There has been too much playing to the base on Brexit." Cllr Leadbitter said current tensions between the UK and EU were damaging the economy, and that immigration rules stopped the area benefitting from foreign expertise. Following Mr Alexander's point, Cllr Leadbitter said: "I'm going to agree with Neil on quite a lot of this. Well, 99 per cent, apart from Independence obviously. "We should not have left the EU and we should rejoin as quickly as possible." Mr Morrice argued that the Scottish Family Party's neutral stance on Brexit and Scottish independence made them a unique offering. Said he was neutral on Brexit, but personally supported a "Norway-style" deal and free trade. However, he also invoked a 2019 trade war between the US and EU which led to a 25 per cent US tariff on whisky, as evidence of the downside of EU membership. Cllr Robertson said the Brexit vote happened despite the public having "very little knowledge" about the issues, but said there were now "opportunities". "We need to stop navel-gazing and wishing it didn't happen - it did happen," she said. "Ask me again in five years and I will tell you if we made the right decision." Question 6 - Concerns over stopping oil production Candidates were also asked what would replace petrochemicals in core industries, should Scottish oil and gas production to be stopped for environmental reasons. Oil-based materials, they heard, were essential in nearly every area of today's economy, including life-saving medical equipment. All six agreed that no currently-existing material can replace petrochemicals entirely. Mr Alexander argued that Liberal Democrat plans to invest in research and development may hold part of the answer. Cllr Leadbitter said his party were focused largely on fossil fuels which had created the worst environmental impact, required the most-urgent action and for which there are alternatives. He added that a "minimum level" of oil production would be required for the foreseeable future. Mr Morrice said it would be "very irresponsible to basically mothball oil and gas", while Cllr Robertson said "we are not going to be able to switch it off overnight". Cllr van der Horn, however, said: "I long for the day where we are no longer pumping oil and gas out of the North Sea." He backed his party's pledge to revoke all new oil and gas licenses. He added: "We need to have a healthy planet so we can have healthy people." What do you make of the candidates' takes on the biggest issues facing businesses in Moray and the Highlands? Email us at: newsdesk@northern-scot.co.uk to let us know Graphic    Neil Alexander - Scottish Liberal Democrats.Moray Chamber of Commerce's Election Hustings for Moray West, Nairn and Strathspey at UHI Moray in Elgin. Picture: Beth Taylor Load-Date: July 2, 2024  End of Document
