   How not to run a country: the Theresa May years; Book of the week This account of Britain's Brexit negotiations reveals just how passive and useless she was as PM. By Sam Freedman The Times (London) April 27, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: SATURDAY REVIEW;FEATURES; Pg. 10,11 Length: 1333 words Byline: Sam Freedman Body   No Way Out Brexit, from Backstop to Boris by Tim Shipman William Collins, 736pp; £26 I f 2019 was the Brexit election, in 2024 the issue will barely be mentioned at all. For the Conservatives it has become an unmitigated political disaster. Having lost younger, liberal, Remain voters, they are haemorrhaging disappointed Leave voters, who have seen no material improvement in their lives. Labour, having already banked most of those Remain voters, are keen to avoid putting off the defecting Leavers, so are staying shtum. Everyone will be doing their best not to mention Brexit. Except for Tim Shipman, the chief political commentator at The Sunday Times, who has produced a 700-page epic on the miserable two years from the 2017 election to Boris Johnson taking over as prime minister. It follows his previous two volumes on the referendum and the aftermath, with a final one to come, in late June, on the illfated Johnson and Truss premierships. This instalment is a whole lot of Brexit, and it's a testament to Shipman's journalistic skills that he's able to keep the story moving through endless rounds of negotiations, with the EU and within the Tory party. There are enough tasty vignettes and morsels of gossip to make the main course of backstops and "meaningful" votes enjoyable for fans of the previous volumes. It is also a scrupulously even-handed account that will be of great value to future historians. As in the first two books, Shipman avoids easy caricatures and sets out the real-world constraints and pressures acting on the players. Despite this, it is a study in failure. In the introduction he cites the multivolume biography of Lyndon Johnson by Robert Caro as an inspiration. But whereas Caro had as his subject one of the deftest political operators in history, Shipman has Theresa May, making it more of a "how not to" guide. In recent years May's reputation has had something of a rehabilitation. Compared with the scandalous chaos of the Johnson years, and Truss's cosmic lack of self-awareness, she seems in retrospect at least vaguely prime ministerial and serious. In the conclusion Shipman - bending over backwards to be fair - suggests she might have been a good prime minister if she hadn't had to deal with the challenges of Brexit. But the book does not support that argument. What is most striking is her astonishing passivity. She eventually decided what her red lines were - ending free movement and protecting the Union - but there was never any strategy, beyond relentless stubbornness, to get others to accept the tradeoffs necessary to secure them. She brought Brexiteers into her government, only to freeze them out, making it easy for them to walk away and campaign against her. She allowed the fogeyish attorney-general Geoffrey Cox ("an acquired taste, particularly if you're a woman", as one colleague puts it) to become the arbiter of whether the deal met the needs of the most fervent pro- Brexit MPs, for no good reason. Then she did nothing to try to influence or mitigate his opinion, which killed the thing stone dead. Most of all, she was unable to communicate the benefits of her deal to anyone - as one MP says, "She couldn't sell a cold drink in a hot desert." A politician with any sense of flair and imagination could have turned her deal into something that sounded like a big win, allowing for control of immigration while protecting trade, something that Remainers said the EU would never agree to. Instead she made it sound like a frustrating compromise. At every point her basic lack of political skill made a difficult situation worse. In a call to try to stop her first Brexit secretary, David Davis, from resigning, she sounded, in the words of someone listening in, "like someone ringing to say your Hoover bag's ready for collection". In the minutes before a key TV interview with the BBC's Nick Robinson she sat staring into space while he tried to engage her. She didn't sum up decisions in meetings, or even give a view, letting everyone think their point had won the day. She wouldn't consider trying to win over Labour MPs until it was far too late. It's hard to fathom why someone with so little interest in leadership wanted to be prime minister. The only mitigation is that so many of those around her were profoundly unhelpful and small-minded. The Speaker, John Bercow, did everything he could to make her life harder, repeatedly going against the advice of his clerks. Jeremy Corbyn was even more passive than May, entirely uninterested in Brexit. Present but not involved. The pro-Brexit rebels marched around like they were about to lead a tank charge at El Alamein, unleashing violent metaphors about nooses and coffins in May's direction. The Tory MP Mark Francois wobbling around Westminster informing people that "I was in the army. I was trained not to lose," added to the air, as Shipman puts it, "of a bad sitcom". The Brexit diehards were certain that the ability to diverge from EU trade rules was a matter of such importance that they were willing to destroy their own government, but at no point did they develop any plan as to what this divergence might look like. Perhaps the most telling moment in the book is when Davis had to drop his "Project After", setting out the benefits to be accrued when Britain was free of the shackles of EU regulation, because ditching workers' rights or scrapping environmental rules would be too toxic to voters. His deputy, Steve Baker, was left feebly complaining "about why his motorbike isn't allowed to be as noisy as he likes". On the other side of the argument the "Bresister" MPs, as Shipman calls them, had a more realistic view of the trade-offs, and come across as less psychologically disturbed, but were hopelessly divided. Too few were willing to give up on their ideal outcome, whether a second referendum or a customs union, so ended up missing the plentiful opportunities to secure a softer Brexit. It's a sorry tale. The only people who come out with much credit are those who negotiated the actual deal, on the British and EU sides. Olly Robbins, May's chief civil service negotiator - and rumoured to be on Keir Starmer's list for the next head of the civil service - does come in for criticism for being overly secretive and dismissive of politicians (which, when they are Dominic Raab, is perhaps not unreasonable). But the deal he helped to secure is described, correctly, as a "brilliant civil service attempt to reconcile red lines that were close to mutually contradictory". It was not the civil servants' job to manage internal Tory party politics. On the EU side there is some criticism of its politicians' initially rigid positions, particularly on Northern Ireland, but there is no disputing they were better prepared and managed their own internal politics far more adeptly. Jean- Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, and his powerful adviser Martin Selmayr were, far from being the ogres of Brexiteer imagination, more flexible in finding solutions than anyone else. Looking to the future, one of the book's intriguing subplots is Starmer's ability, as Labour's shadow Brexit secretary, to manipulate Corbyn's team into getting his way on key decisions, and his single-minded determination to make himself frontrunner for the post-Corbyn leadership. How this ruthlessness will manifest when he becomes prime minister is the biggest question for the next few years. After all, although Brexit will be ignored during this election, it hasn't - and won't - go away. Starmer will need to find a way to manage growing pressure from his own side to revisit the status quo, which is satisfying no one. It's hard not to wonder, as you work through this meticulously constructed narrative, whether one day we'll be reading an equally epic account of the tortuous negotiations to get us back into the EU. Sam Freedman writes the politics and policy Substack Comment Is Freed One MP said of Theresa May, 'She couldn't sell a cold drink in a hot desert' Graphic    Boris Johnson and Theresa May in London, 2016. Left: May in 2018 Load-Date: April 27, 2024  End of Document
