   Ian McConnell: What-s this? Some Brexit sense from Labour amid nonsense The Herald January 29, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 924 words Byline: Ian McConnell Body   We have in recent days heard some good sense on Brexit, and more nonsense. The sense, not for the first time, came from Mayor of London Sadiq Khan. As a business editor, it is heartening to hear a politician not only spell out the realities of a troublesome economic situation well but also suggest how the damage could be mitigated, in a sensible way. This is a rarer scenario than you might think. And it has been frustrating to watch senior figures in the same party as Mr Khan, notably Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer and shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves, largely embrace Brexit and its associated woes by pledging not to rejoin the European single market and customs union. READ MORE: Ian McConnell: So now Brexit failure is Joe Biden's fault? This is laughable They have proposed what surely amounts only to some tinkering, such as better post-Brexit arrangements for the professional services sector. While in Davos in Switzerland earlier this month to sell Labour-s story to big global businesses and investors, Ms Reeves told Bloomberg: -Britain is outside the European Union, the single market, the customs union, and free movement, and those things won-t change under a Labour government. -But we don-t think that the deal that the Conservatives secured was the best deal available and we would build on that deal, working with our neighbours and trading partners in Europe, to strengthen it in key areas including for professional services, which were frankly sold down the river in those Brexit negotiations. We are working with business to establish the priorities for those negotiations.- Last weekend, at the Fabian Society conference in London, Mr Khan criticised the -omerta- over even debating whether the UK could rejoin the European single market. This was a much more encouraging contribution on Brexit. Mr Khan has made plain his view that there should be consideration of whether the UK should rejoin the single market and customs union when the Brexit agreement comes up for review in 2025. He said in January last year: -We need greater alignment with our European neighbours - a shift from this extreme, hard Brexit we have now to a workable version that serves our economy and people. That includes having a pragmatic debate about the benefits of being a part of the customs union and the single market.- Of course, Mr Khan represents London, which like Scotland voted heavily against Brexit. This means it is probably much easier, politically, for Mr Khan to spell out the great costs of Brexit. Sir Keir and Ms Reeves are surely aware of these enormous costs. After all, you do not have to look far to see them spelled out. Office for Budget Responsibility chairman Richard Hughes, when asked by the BBC-s Laura Kuenssberg in March 2023 about how much stronger the UK economy would be had the country stayed in the EU, replied: -We think that in the long run it reduces our overall output by around 4% compared with had we remained in the EU.- And forecasts in November 2018 from the Theresa May government showed Brexit would, with an average free trade deal with the EU, result in UK gross domestic product in 15 years- time being 4.9% lower than if the country had stayed in the bloc if there were no change to migration arrangements. Or 6.7% worse on the basis of zero net inflow of workers from European Economic Area countries. READ MORE: Ian McConnell: What a relief - some sense from Labour on Brexit Yet Sir Keir and Ms Reeves seem at pains not to address this colossal cost. Mr Khan, in an interview with The Observer published last weekend, called for a -youth mobility- agreement with the EU. This would be a major step in the right direction, given the degree to which young people in the UK have suffered by having their opportunities to work and study in the EU so dismally restricted by the Tory hard Brexit. READ MORE: Denial after denial from brass-necked Tory arch-Brexiter It would also be a major boost to key sectors in the UK, including hospitality but also many others, hit hard by the labour and skills shortages fuelled by the Brexit folly. Many sectors desperately need workers from EU countries to maximise their potential to succeed, and to create wealth and economic prosperity. It goes without saying that rejoining the European single market would be a much more positive step still, and Mr Khan is absolutely right to highlight the need for such a move to be debated. Secretary of State for Business and Trade Kemi Badenoch, for her part, continues to demonstrate the utter bizarreness of her Government-s trade policy. She did so with a straight face when answering questions from MPs on the Business and Trade Committee last week. Ms Badenoch highlighted the UK Government-s continuing preoccupation with drumming up trade with countries on the other side of the world, in the Indo-Pacific, and showed far less interest in what she described as -mature- European economies. Back in the real world, the cost of losing frictionless trade with the UK-s biggest destination for exports, the European Economic Area, is colossal. Ms Badenoch even blamed a change of administration in the US for the ruling Tory Brexiters failing to meet their target of free trade agreements covering 80% of the UK-s trade. The UK Government in 2019 targeted this proportion by the end of 2022. So now we are meant to believe the Tory Brexit failure is Joe Biden-s fault? The bizarre focus and excuses from the Conservatives at times seem like comedy gold. However, major damage to the economy and living standards is no laughing matter. Load-Date: January 29, 2024  End of Document
