   Is there ANYTHING Remoaners won't blame on Brexit?; From Sheridan Smith's musical being axed to a shortage of sausages at Ikea... Mail on Sunday (London) May 19, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 23 Length: 1158 words Byline: ross clark Body   FACED with his new musical in London's West End, starring Sheridan Smith, closing two months early after receiving a series of dreadful reviews, Rufus Wainwright was in no doubt as to the culprit. Never mind that, as The Mail on Sunday revealed, some audience members were walking out at the interval, it was Brexit wot did it. 'I do feel that since Brexit, England has entered into a darker corridor where it is a little more narrow in its outlook,' whined Wainwright earlier this month. 'There's a lack of imagination and curiosity about change.' To blame the failure of a musical on Brexit was so outrageous that even the Brexit-opposing Observer newspaper felt the need to suggest that there might just possibly have been other factors. Its writer David Benedict, also a columnist with The Stage, reminded Wainwright that critics have been bleating about the conservative tastes of West End theatre-goers since at least the 1950s. Even the anti-Brexit New York Times thought Wainwright's play was a turkey, its critic calling the show a 'sludgy travesty'. With many Remoaners still unable to accept Britain voted to leave the EU, almost eight years on from the referendum, you can't expect too much in the way of objectivity. Brexit has become the standard, hackneyed excuse for when anything goes wrong in Britain. It's been blamed for high inflation (by former Bank of England governor Mark Carney among others) - yet prices have soared in every developed country as a result of Covid and Russia's invasion of Ukraine. It's been blamed for low growth - despite the UK economy having grown at a similar rate to France since the pandemic, and at a slightly higher rate than Germany's. Brexit was also fingered by health think-tank the Nuffield Trust last month for a shortage of NHS medicines - when the entire global supply chain has been under pressure since Covid. Severe lockdowns in China disrupted supplies, and Western pharmaceutical giants were preoccupied with making vaccines. The end of lockdowns, too, brought a surge in demand for treatment for conditions people had put off reporting to their doctor. But a glass has to be raised to the sheer chutzpah of suggesting Brexit would lead to a rise in dogging. Yes, at the 2019 Conservative party conference, an unnamed Cabinet Minister, with a Rufus Wainwright-grade appetite for drivel, said he feared queues of lorries waiting to get through Dover would lead to their drivers seeking sex in lay-bys. Sadly, Kent police were unable to provide me with any statistics to bear this out. We all know that Britain has an obesity problem, but one which has been caused, or made worse, by Brexit? That was the extraordinary claim in a paper by researchers at the Oxford Martin School in 2018 which said 'any increase in trade costs are likely to have a negative impact on the availability and consumption of foods that are critical components of healthy diets and chronic disease prevention'. There are two key things wrong with the theory Brexit has exacerbated obesity in Britain. First, the UK adult population ballooned all the way through our membership of the EU. In 1975, ten per cent of the population was obese but by 2016 it was 30 per cent - perhaps helped by a croissant or two. Second, Brexit has done nothing to make healthy food unaffordable: on the contrary, it remains cheaper to buy fresh fruit and vegetables in Britain than most other places in Europe. According to the World Bank, in 2021 (five years after the Brexit vote), it cost the equivalent of $1.95 per person a day to afford a 'well-balanced diet' in Britain, compared with $3.08 in Germany and $3.25 in France. Not that this has stopped Remainers screaming 'Brexit' if they spot an empty shelf in a supermarket. They did so in February 2023 when a shortage of tomatoes and salad led some shops to ration supplies. Yet the shortage was felt all over Europe because high fuel costs had forced growers in Northern Europe to turn off their heated greenhouses, while poor weather blighted Spain's salad-growing region. In March, a newspaper reported that an importer of Scandinavian foodstuffs, whose clients include Ikea and Ocado, said it was struggling to deliver customers' 'favourite red sausages' because suppliers 'had been put off by the new red tape'. Brexit, apparently, has ruined sport, too. Last September, the race director of cycling's Tour of Britain - our answer to the Tour de France - declared that the reason only 96 riders had entered was 'purely and simply Brexit'. His reasoning was that teams feared having their buses and lorries held up at Dover. Never mind that critics complained of a 'boring' route made of flat stages around Altrincham - hardly the steep hairpins of Alpe d'Huez - or that the race had lost its main sponsor, investment firm A J Bell. Oh, and Brexit is to blame for sewage discharges. That claim was made in 2021 by the European Movement UK when it was revealed the Environment Agency had allowed water companies temporarily to release untreated sewage into rivers as a result of delays in delivery of chemicals used to treat the muck. Blaming it on Brexit overlooked the fact it was in the middle of a pandemic with supply chains disrupted. And the problem of sewage discharges goes back to the fateful decision made in Victorian times to combine foul sewers with storm drains, meaning that sewage is discharged into rivers whenever the latter are overwhelmed. Rising fares on budget airlines? Of course, they have nothing to do with debts built up from the pandemic when flights were grounded or because airlines took advantage of the lack of competition with some rivals having gone to the www.wall.No, Brexit is to blame. Then there was the 'surge' in hate crimes supposedly sparked by Brexit. Hours after the Leave vote, Remain campaigners highlighted how a window had been smashed at a Spanish restaurant in South London - until the police blamed an attempted burglary. Hate crimes are claimed to have 'doubled' after Brexit - an assertion made on the back of a single week's figures in 2016. Yet, over the longer term, it is impossible to detect a rise in hate crimes connected with Brexit - the steady increase in reporting them has been apparent for 15 years as police have encouraged people to come forward. Brexit has caused genuine problems for some people. Importers and exporters have faced extra costs and delays. British holidaymakers have been caught out by rules which deny entry to EU countries in cases where their passport was issued more than nine years and nine months ago. But much of what gets blamed on Brexit is exaggeration and nonsense on the part of people that are looking for an oven-ready diversion from their own failures. Remainers ought to cheer Brexit, for without it they might actually have to take responsibility for the state of Britain today. It has become the hackneyed excuse for things that go wrong People use it as a diversion from their own failures Load-Date: May 19, 2024  End of Document
