   It's Brexit that has sealed the Tories' fate City A.M. July 1, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 City A.M. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 328 words Byline: James Chapman Body   BREXIT, the great unmentionable of this general election campaign, is what has really sealed the Tories' fate. Those who voted to remain have been alienated and infuriated to watch the disaster that has unfolded. In traditionally true blue commuter belt seats like Esher and Walton, where I live, the Liberal Democrats look set to clean up at the expense of the Tories as a result. Those who voted leave are no more impressed with the Tories' handling of Brexit. They consider that the Brexiteers told them a pack of lies and can't be trusted, a sense compounded by Boris Johnson's dissembling over Partygate. The economic benefits that were promised have palpably failed to arrive, and instead the damage Brexit has done to the economy is obvious, even masked as it is by the impact of Covid. As a result, voters are deeply disillusioned with the entire Brexit project. Less than a quarter (24 per cent) now think the UK should remain outside of the EU, while 71 per cent say the economy is worse off because of Brexit. Polls consistently show that over 60 per cent of voters would opt to go back in, given the chance. Even if the UK was forced to join the euro as a condition of reentry (and surely an accommodation would be reached to enable the UK to stay out, given its longstanding position on the pound), almost half of all voters already want to rejoin. Labour has steadfastly refused to engage with the subject in this campaign. Indeed, its election manifesto commits to staying outside the EU and even vows to 'make Brexit work'. This is simply incompatible with Labour's pledge to pull all the available levers to stimulate economic growth. The single biggest thing the party could do to kickstart the economy - rejoining the EU single market - is ruled out, apparently forever. Promises of a better trading relationship seem certain to prove hollow given this position. Having promised to make it work, Labour will quickly find that it owns the problem in government. Load-Date: July 1, 2024  End of Document
