   Keir Starmer will 'unpick' Brexit if he is handed a landslide majority in election, warns Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch MailOnline June 23, 2024 Sunday 9:37 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 307 words Byline: Jason Groves Political Editor Body   Sir Keir Starmer will 'unpick Brexit' if he is handed a landslide majority, Kemi Badenoch warns today. Writing in the Daily Mail, the Business Secretary says the Labour leader - who campaigned for a second referendum - has shown a 'total lack of belief' in Britain's ability to thrive outside the EU. Ms Badenoch appeals to those who backed Brexit in 2016 to rally behind the Tories - or risk being dragged back into Brussels' orbit. She warns disaffected Tories that a vote for Reform will 'split the vote against Labour, enabling a strengthened Starmer to unpick Brexit'. Her intervention comes as senior Tories step up warnings about Labour's intentions on Brexit. As Jeremy Corbyn's shadow Brexit secretary, Sir Keir led Labour's opposition to leaving the EU and pressed for a second referendum. In his ten-point manifesto to succeed Mr Corbyn four years ago, he pledged to 'defend free movement'. But he has steadily shifted his rhetoric as Labour seeks to retake pro-Brexit seats in traditional Red Wall constituencies. The Labour leader has said he will not seek to rejoin the EU or apply for membership of the single market. But he and Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves have signalled they are willing to sign up to EU rules in some areas in order to secure a closer relationship. Rishi Sunak warned Labour's plan to negotiate a new deal with Brussels would 'recreate that Brexit doom loop'. The Prime Minister told The Sun that Sir Keir would sign Britain up to 'rules that we didn't vote for'. Former trade secretary Sir Liam Fox warned: 'We can almost see the white flags being raised by Starmer and co already. 'The great irony is that those who are considering voting Reform, and who were great champions for Brexit in the referendum, will make its reversal more likely by denying seats to the Conservatives and giving Labour a big victory.' Load-Date: June 23, 2024  End of Document
