   Kemi: Keir will 'unpick' Brexit Scottish Daily Mail June 24, 2024 Monday Edition 2, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 301 words Byline: Jason Groves Body   SIR Keir Starmer will 'unpick Brexit' if he is handed a landslide majority, Kemi Badenoch has warned. The Business Secretary has told the Daily Mail that the Labour leader - who campaigned for a second referendum - has a 'total lack of belief' in Britain's ability to thrive outside the EU. Ms Badenoch is urging those who backed Brexit in 2016 to rally behind the Tories - or risk being dragged back into Brussels' orbit. She has also warned disaffected Tories that voting Reform will simply 'split the vote against Labour'. Ms Badenoch said: 'We've only just started to see the benefits of leaving the EU. There is so much more to come, but a Labour supermajority risks losing it all. 'Every utterance from Keir Starmer, Rachel Reeves or any of the Shadow Cabinet, every hint of a giveaway on fishing, migration or regulation, betrays a total lack of belief in the British people to thrive in a selfgoverning democracy. 'I know many good people who believe in Brexit are tempted to vote for Reform. I understand their feelings but a vote for Reform will split the vote against Labour, enabling a strengthened Starmer to unpick Brexit. 'The only way to stop us going back to square one with Labour is to vote Conservative on July 4.' Her intervention comes as senior Tories step up warnings about Labour's intentions on Brexit. Sir Keir has said he will not seek to rejoin the EU or apply for membership of the single market. But he and his Shadow Chancellor Ms Reeves have signalled they are willing to sign up to EU rules in some areas in order to secure a closer relationship. Prime Minister Rishi Sunak said Labour's plan to negotiate with Brussels would 'recreate that Brexit doom loop', while former trade secretary Sir Liam Fox warned: 'We can almost see the white flags being raised by Starmer and co already.' Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
