   Key goal for Starmer must be to reset UK-EU relations Irish Independent June 24, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 500 words Body   nlike the criticism of the English football team's shortcomings, dissenting voices on the wisdom of Brexit still seems to be a no-go area across the water. U There is zero prospect of the UK returning to the European Union any time soon. But that doesn't mean good neighbours can't work together. In 10 days' time, a new government will be in place in Downing Street. The Westminster elections on July 4 are teeing up to be a washout for the Conservatives. The Tory party's hubris over the last decade has truly come back to bite it. The root of their ills lies in Brexit and the chaotic management since of what was once regarded as a shining light of an administration. The UK Labour Party is poised to return to power with an enormous majority. Its leadership is already paving the way for improved relations with the EU. Labour's shadow chancellor of the exchequer Rachel Reeves wants to break down EU trade barriers and secure billions of pounds through an early international investment summit after the general election. Ms Reeves wants to revisit parts of former UK prime minister Boris Johnson's Brexit deal, including seeking closer alignment with EU rules in areas such as the chemicals sector and a better deal for finance workers. "We would look to improve our trading relationship with Europe, and do trade deals around the world," she said, as she vowed that an incoming Labour government would "reset" Britain's global image, she told the Financial Times at the weekend. The comments are being interpreted in London as a sign that Labour wants to go further than previously thought and seek better UK-EU trade terms. The view is that Labour will ditch the adversarial post-Brexit relationship with Brussels, crafted by the Tories, and the fixation with regulatory divergence. Johnson's slogan at the last general election in 2019 was "Get Brexit Done". Labour leader Keir Starmer's mantra seems to be "Get Brexit Fixed". It is noteworthy that Labour is only now expanding on its views on EU relations so close to polling day and with a 20 percentage point lead over the Tories. But Labour's move makes economic sense for all concerned. The British public has seen the cost of Brexit, with an opinion poll showing 56pc of voters now believe leaving the EU has been bad for the UK economy as a whole and 62pc believing it has contributed to higher prices in shops. Starmer's plan to boost economic growth will be hampered by the lack of access to EU markets. Economists are warning the UK will have to rejoin the customs union if Starmer is to fulfil his pledges. Following the toxicity of the Brexit negotiations, nobody in Brussels will relish a delegation from Whitehall landing outside the door. But a more pragmatic approach from the UK side would be a start. Starmer will have to invest much into restoring the trust lost by the ideological approach of the Tories. Improved relations between the UK and EU will also be welcomed on these shores, which became the frontline of the consequences of Brexit. Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
