   Labour's secret plan to ditch Brexit border curbs; Party 'wants freedom of movement for Brits restored' Scottish Mail on Sunday June 9, 2024 Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 625 words Byline: Anna Mikhailova Body   A SENIOR Labour figure has said the party will bring back freedom of movement, in bombshell comments seen by The Mail on Sunday. They reveal plans for a Labour government to reopen Brexit talks and claim that 'restoring freedom of movement is paramount'. Last night senior Conservatives accused Sir Keir Starmer of 'lying' to the British public about his plans. Former Tory party leader Sir Iain Duncan Smith said: 'This is stage one, two and three of re-entering the European Union.' Fiona Urquhart, chairman of Labour International, the group tasked with rallying expats to vote for Labour in next month's election, has also pledged to give EU-based Britons their own MP in Westminster. She also appeared to admit that Labour is not being upfront with its plans ahead of the election, saying: 'The party is being cautious, it's not making too many bold announcements because, should it come to power, it does not know what it's going to be faced with. 'But I can't stress enough that it is well aware of many of the problems facing Britons overseas, especially in the EU.' In the interview with a Mallorca local newspaper, she said: 'Should Labour win the next election, it is prepared to revisit some of the Brexit agreements, such as the Windsor Agreement, and make it easier for Britons to come and go in Europe. Restoring that freedom of movement is paramount and a meeting to discuss the Trade and Cooperation agreement has already been agreed on for 2026.' She also said: 'The Labour Party has made it clear that it wants to see a greater level of freedom of movement within the EU for Britons, in particular for professionals and trade.' This could include scrapping the 90-day rule [the cumulative duration of any stay in the EU within a 180-day period] and boosting the pensions of Brits living in the EU. Ms Urquhart added: 'It would have to be part of a bigger deal.' A Labour source last night said it was not official party policy. But Sir Iain said: 'The EU has made it absolutely clear it is not prepared to allow freedom of movement solely for British citizens, and that this would have to be a new negotiation. 'What Labour are running is a subterranean pro-EU campaign which will surface the day after election day. Most Labour MPs will vote for it and it will be re-entry through the back door.' He said that Ms Urquhart's interview has 'blown the gaff on their real plans'. Former Brexit Secretary David Davis said: 'You won't get free movement solely for Brits. 'This is a lie, a nonsense. The trade-off will be going back to full free movement. If this is Labour policy they should say so loud and clear, not to sneak it in a Mallorca newspaper.' It comes after former prime minister Boris Johnson warned Sir Keir would drag the UK back into the EU in all but name if he becomes PM. Writing in yesterday's Daily Mail Mr Johnson said there was a 'gigantic Labour conspiracy of silence' over its Brexit plans. In the interview, aimed at Britons living in the EU, Ms Urquhart said Labour is the only party willing to 'resolve' Brexit, while admitting that it is 'too late' to reverse it. 'Closer working relations have to be struck and the only party which is prepared to go down that route is Labour,' she added. On giving EU Britons their own representation, she said: 'MPs for Britons overseas could become a reality under a Labour government.' Overseas voters are a significant constituency in this election for the first time. Rules that came in this year mean 3.5million adults are now eligible to vote. A Labour spokesman said: 'None of this is our policy. We've left the EU and Labour is clear we're not going back.' Comment - Page 22 'It will be re-entry through the back door' 'Subterranean pro-EU campaign which will surface after election' Graphic    HERE FOR THE BEER: Sir Keir Starmer on the campaign trail in North London yesterday Load-Date: June 9, 2024  End of Document
