   Labour will hand control of Britain's borders back to the EU The Sunday Telegraph (London) June 23, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 782 words Byline: James Cleverly Body   SIR KEIR STARMER didn't just oppose Brexit, he voted to block it 48 times in parliament and was the one leading the charge for a second referendum to overturn the first. So it comes perhaps as no huge surprise that he appears to want to get Britain back into the Brussels block by the back door. Starmer has never thought the UK could survive and thrive as an independent country - and Brexit Britain has shown him how wrong he was. Defying his dire predictions, the UK has grown faster than Germany, Italy, and Japan since the referendum in 2016. Britain is the fourth biggest exporter in the world behind only China, the US and Germany. Since leaving the EU we have signed trade deals with over 70 countries, partners that accounted for £1.1 trillion of UK bilateral trade in 2022. We have revoked or reformed over 2,000 EU laws, freeing our businesses up from burdensome red tape. We have taken back control of our fishing waters and our support scheme for farmers. We made use of our freedoms to be the fastest to roll out the life-saving vaccine in Europe. Despite this, Starmer doesn't believe in Britain's future as a sovereign nation. Instead, he and his manifesto talk gleefully about the need to "deepen" Britain's relationship with "our European friends" and build on our current "thin" deal with the EU. But he is refusing to be upfront and honest with the British people about what he will accept in return for his fatter deal. The EU could not be clearer that removing "barriers to trade" comes hand in hand with accepting the supremacy of EU law and diktats from the European Court of Justice. But Britain voted for Brexit to take back control of our laws. A more comprehensive trade deal like the one Switzerland has with the EU requires free movement of EU citizens into their country. But Britain voted for Brexit to take back control of our borders. And despite Starmer's denials, senior figures in the Labour party still appear to be eyeing up rejoining the Customs Union. That could put British taxpayers on the hook for a hefty annual bill and prevent the UK striking its own trade deals. And Britain voted for Brexit to take back control of our money and our trade. So far, Starmer's schemes appear to amount to a spectacular betrayal of the British people's vote. Clearly, he can still not accept their democratic decision. He seems still to want to cast away all of our new-found freedoms to be back in his familiar territory of the EU's orbit. Worse still, he wants to go further with new concessions to the EU. Labour has indicated that they are considering joining an EU quota scheme for migration. That's likely to mean the UK taking 100,000 more illegal migrants into our country from the EU - the opposite of what the British people want. Funnily enough, they weren't sufficiently honest to front it up and stick it in their manifesto. Together with their plan to scrap the Rwanda deterrent and an illegal migration amnesty, they would cement our position as the soft-touch capital of the world for illegal migrants. And if that weren't enough, Starmer wants to try to undermine Nato too, by entering into a new defence pact with the EU. Anyone who has seen the EU trying to decide how to respond to a defence threat as a bloc will be horrified at the idea of the UK being bound by its inertia. It would alienate our Five Eyes allies and weaken our position on the world stage. In fact, they can't convincingly rule out going whole hog and rejoining Britain to the EU as a fully paid-up member. Make no mistake, Brexit would be in grave peril under Labour. In contrast, we the Conservatives have a plan to go further still in seizing our Brexit benefits. We will complete the process of joining the Transpacific Partnership (CPTPP) of fast-growing nations. Once we join, the CPTPP will have a combined GDP of £12 trillion, an exciting opportunity for British businesses and entrepreneurs and a huge boost to our economy. We will scrap more defective EU law to build 100,000 more homes for families to get their feet on the housing ladder. And we will control migration with a new legal cap to get numbers falling every year for the next five years and give democratically accountable MPs a vote on annual levels. That's the clear choice at this election - between the Conservatives' clear plan to seize even more benefits of Brexit, protect our democracy and build a more secure future for our children and grandchildren, and Labour who have no ideas other to overturn the democratic will of the people, raise taxes and take us back to square one. James Cleverly is the Home Secretary 'So far, Starmer's schemes appear to amount to a spectacular betrayal of the British people's vote' Load-Date: June 23, 2024  End of Document
