   Labour cannot shut down the Brexit question for ever i-news June 22, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 28 Length: 1154 words Byline: DONALD MACINTYRE Body   Because Angela Rayner is a refreshingly human politician with blood in her veins, she might have been expected to have committed a gaffe or two in this election. In fact, the closest she has so far come to making news was because she was too disciplined. Asked in a multi-party ITV debate last week if Labour would "ever" push for Britain to rejoin the EU or even the single market, she just said: "No." She might have used a forgivable evasion. Something like: "Well, 'ever' is a big word but not in any future I can see. Who knows what will happen down the line when you and I are over the hill?" In politician-speak that would have basically kept Labour's options open from the parliament after next. That she didn't showed that she was sticking to the letter of Labour's all-pervasive approach to Brexit: if it comes up, shut it down. Indeed, anyone who raises Brexit in this election is quickly made to feel like Basil Fawlty, pathologically unable to take his own advice not to "mention the war" when German guests arrive in his hotel. It is just not a topic to be spoken of in polite society. The Tories keep off it because it has so patently not been the stunning success confidently predicted during the 2016 referendum. (Challenged over this in Thursday night's Question Time interrogation of party's leaders, Rishi Sunak was obliged to fall back on the Teeside Freeport, though it isn't even clear that, besides being dogged by allegations of sharp business practice, it needed Britain to be out of the EU to be created.) And, for Labour, it can't be discussed because of a fact that remains stubbornly unmentionable, namely that Keir Starmer had not only opposed Brexit but actually suggested at the 2018 Labour Party conference that the issue might be revisited in a second referendum. Certainly it may seem odd to future historians that probably the most momentous act of domestic politics in the lifetime of the present government is almost wholly absent from the present election debate. Particularly since a Statista poll last month shows 55 per cent of voters thinking Brexit was the wrong decision, and only 31 per cent that it was the right one. We're all so mesmerised by Brexit being a non-issue that Starmer is repeatedly challenged on what he may have been wrong about in the past - like saying that Jeremy Corbyn would have been a great prime minister - and not on an issue he has been proved right about. But this really isn't about the past. The Brexit ship has sailed. Rather, it's about the future. Labour's manifesto, even if strictly speaking it covers only the lifetime of the next parliament, has ruled out not only rejoining but re-entry to a customs union or the single market. Yet an incoming government committed to economic growth as its first and overriding priority can hardly ignore what former Tony Blair lieutenant Alastair Campbell calls "the elephant in the room". For the negative economic impact of Brexit is real enough, as the indicators reeled off by Campbell in his New European column this week demonstrate. These include estimates of a total cost of £100bn a year to the British economy from Bloomberg Economics; of a four per cent loss of productivity from the Office for Budget Responsibility; and of a Brexitinfluenced five per cent fall in growth since 2015 from Goldman Sachs. In fact, a recent report from Britain in a Changing Europe has a lower figure of between two and four per cent, when the impact of Covid and the Ukraine war is taken into account, but that is still a major damper on the future economic growth on which Labour's plans depend. Undoing this damage by reducing some of the barriers between Britain and the EU will be a painfully slow process. Labour is committed to a veterinary agreement which would ease agricultural trade, and shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves has started to talk about forms of regulatory "alignment" for industries such as pharmaceuticals. But most experts think the impact of such steps on overall growth, though positive, will be minimal. A serious problem is that the EU itself has in many respects moved on from Brexit and is preoccupied with many other issues, internal and external. Restoring good faith between it and Britain would require some initiatives by the new government. The shadow Foreign Secretary, David Lammy, has suggested deeper defence co-operation with EU states, where Britain has something positive to bring to the party. This is an important step. But there's something else, an idea canvassed by the European Commission itself: an EU-UK Youth Mobility Scheme for young people between 18 and 30. As Cambridge European law professor Catherine Barnard argues, they are the group most affected by the loss of opportunities caused by Brexit. The plan for mutual travel between Britain and one EU country for work, study, leisure or volunteering was dismissed by Rishi Sunak, and then by Labour when it was proposed, though London Mayor Sadiq Khan has proposed something similar. And although an anti-immigration opposition would insist otherwise, it is very much not a return to the dreaded "free movement" because it is time-limited to four years. Moreover, Britain already has several such schemes and was seeking others, including, bilaterally, with some EU member states. As even some of Labour's most ardent pro-Europeans acknowledge, reversing the economic damage inflicted by Brexit won't be easy even in a second Labour term, if there is one. The seemingly seductive middle way of entering the single market has its downsides. Despite the huge potential economic benefits of a common regulatory regime between Britain and the EU, it would mean, because the UK would no longer be playing a role in shaping that regime, being a "rule-taker" rather than a "rulemaker", raising fresh concerns about a loss of sovereignty. Moreover it would also mean, if Norway and Switzerland (which are in the single market, but not in the EU) are anything to go by, agreeing to free movement of people as well as goods. No one yet knows what the opposition will look like after 4 July, let alone further down the track. But a revived right-wing Tory party, especially if reinforced by the toxic presence of Nigel Farage, would mobilise against anything that meant taking the brakes off European immigration - even if it were offset by enhanced rights for Britons to live and work in Europe and the EU. To start overcoming such opposition might require Keir Starmer, as prime minister, to be true to what must surely still be his instincts. Which would mean using all his powers of argument to show that much closer relations with the EU, historically by far the UK's biggest trading partner, are an undoubted national interest. Opening early negotiations on a youth mobility scheme and explaining why he is doing it would be a start. Patrick Cockburn is away Tories also keep off the subject, as it is not the stunning success predicted Load-Date: June 22, 2024  End of Document
