   Labour's EU trade plan will have 'minimal' effect on costs; Report Financial Times (London, England) June 18, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 474 words Byline: PETER FOSTER Body   Labour's plans to improve the UK's trading relationship with Europe will have "minimal" impact on reducing the economic costs of Brexit, a report by academics and trade economists has warned. The report from the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank came out as shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves promised to improve EU trade ties by aligning the UK more closely with Brussels regulations and seeking a better deal for service professionals. But today's report found that Labour's plan to seek "mainly technical agreements" to improve the EU-UK trade deal, including cutting red tape on food exports and visas for musicians, would only "sand away at the sharpest edges" of the problems caused by Brexit. "Any gains from technical improvements will be relatively minimal: useful in reducing trade frictions but not en- ough to address the continuing econo- mic impacts of Brexit," the report said. Central estimates for the hit to UK GDP from Brexit range between 2 and 4 per cent of GDP, including a 15 per cent dent to trade, according to the Office for Budget Responsibility, the independent fiscal watchdog. The Labour leadership has repeatedly ruled out rejoining the EU single market or entering into a customs union with the EU if it wins next month's general election. But Reeves said in an interview with the Financial Times a Labour government would try to improve trade by aligning industrial www.regulations.UK in a Changing Europe fellow Joël Reland, the report's lead author, said unilaterally aligning with EU rules in areas such as chemicals would have limited benefits as UK companies still needed to demonstrate compliance at the border, requiring extra paperwork. "Alignment is a tempting position for Labour, because it can be done without negotiation, but the flipside is that the economic gains are very marginal. You cannot unilaterally align your way out of post-Brexit border checks," he added. A unilateral decision by the UK to align with EU rules on chemicals may also face resistance from some parts of the chemicals industry. Steve Elliott, chief executive of the Chemical Industries Association trade body, said that while the UK needed to remain "closely connected" with the EU on regulation, this must not mean "the UK becomes a 'rule taker' without any further consideration of the economic and environmental implications". Since the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement came into force in 2021, UK goods exports have suffered. The UK now has the lowest level of goods ex- ports among advanced G7 economies, while services exports have continued to grow strongly. Labour has said it will also seek to negotiate a veterinary agreement with the EU to remove the need for so many checks on plant and animal products. Andy Haldane page 21 'You cannot unilaterally align your way out of post-Brexit border checks' UK in a Changing Europe Load-Date: June 17, 2024  End of Document
