   Labour rules out changes to UK-EU trade ties; Brexit fallout Financial Times (London, England) June 28, 2024 Friday Edition 1, Asian Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 481 words Byline: PETER FOSTER ;SAM FLEMING Body   A Labour government in the UK would not take radical steps to improve trade ties with the EU because reopening political arguments over Brexit would send the wrong message to overseas investors, the party's shadow business secretary said yesterday. Jonathan Reynolds argued that delivering "stability" was Labour's overwhelming priority if, as expected, it won the UK election next week after the head of the country's largest business group called on politicians to stop "walking on eggshells" over the impact of Brexit. While acknowledging that the trade barriers created by Brexit had been "really, really difficult", Reynolds told the British Chambers of Commerce's annual international conference that the lack of consensus over Brexit limited the party's ambitions. "Labour will not be seeking to rejoin the single market or the customs union, or to reopen the wounds of the past, because that would not give us the stability which we know is essential," he said, adding that the party would "take a grown-up approach to Brexit".UK business groups, such as the BCC, the CBI and MakeUK, the manufacturers' group, have asked the next government to take steps to reduce the costs of Brexit for their members. Recommended measures include striking a UK-EU youth mobility accord to enable young people to live and work in each other's countries. Labour has repeatedly ruled out such a deal, saying it would not do anything that looks like a return to free movement of people - a core principle of the bloc that gives unlimited rights to work, study and travel. Instead the main opposition party, which is on track to secure a large majority on July 4, according to opinion polls, has limited itself to a deal that would reduce red tape for touring musicians, who have been badly hit by Brexit. Asked whether Labour would consider a more limited type of youth mobility deal - of the kind that the UK has already with countries such as Australia, Canada and Japan - Reynolds said any negotiation with the EU needed to be considered "in the round". The EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement that was brokered by then prime minister Boris Johnson is due for a five-year review in 2026, which will give the UK an opportunity to improve its terms. Reynolds said better relations with the EU were needed but "the growth can only come from a more stable position in the UK". As an example of what could be achieved within Labour's red lines on negotiations with the EU, Reynolds cited a "New Zealand-style" veterinary accord to reduce border red tape on food and plant exports. Trade experts have said this kind of deal would limit the frequency of checks and paperwork but not remove them. David Henig, UK director at the European Centre for International Political Economy, a think-tank, said any such accord would take time to negotiate, given the EU's high sensitivity about food imports and standards. Graphic    Jonathan Reynolds says that 'Labour will not be seeking to rejoin the single market or the customs union' Load-Date: June 27, 2024  End of Document
