   Lib Dem quits after late night WhatsApp row sees Reform branded 'literally racist' Eastern Daily Press June 21, 2024 Friday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 1031 words Byline: Owen Sennitt Body   The Liberal Democrats' campaign for its top target seat in Norfolk has been hit by an extraordinary internal row after a party activist branded rivals Reform "literally racist". The comment, made by a party member in a WhatsApp group for North Norfolk Lib Dems, sparked a furious late night dispute and sparked the resignation of a senior councillor. Former North Walsham mayor Richard Sims pictured in 2015 (Image: Archant) Richard Sims, a former North Walsham mayor, quit the party's ruling group at North Norfolk District Council in protest at the remark, saying it showed his former colleagues' intolerance of opposing views and showed disrespect to locals who had supported Brexit. Mr Sims, who voted for Brexit himself, said: "If they are going to say Reform is racist then that implies the 58.9pc of people in North Norfolk who voted to leave the EU are also racist. "It is not an all-inclusive party if they cannot accept people voting for Brexit."Steffan Aquarone, Liberal Democrat parliamentary candidate for North Norfolk (Image: Supplied) Steffan Aquarone, Lib Dem candidate for North Norfolk and favourite to win the seat from the Tories, tried desperately to smooth over the row on the WhatsApp chat before removing both Mr Sims and the activist from it. He has since taken sides with the unnamed activist against Mr Sims, saying it was "best all round" that he had resigned and condemned remarks he made during the row which he described as containing the "hidden tropes of racism".Richard Sims, former North Walsham mayor and North Norfolk district councillor (Image: North Norfolk District Council) LATE NIGHT ROW Leaked messages from the WhatsApp argument show that the discord began late on Sunday night after an image was shared on a group, which was created to organise campaign activities for the Lib Dems in North Norfolk and has more than 90 people in it. The picture was of a defaced poster for the constituency's Reform candidate Jason Patchett which had been defaced with a "Hitler moustache", according to Mr Sims. It was later deleted from the chat. The original image had already been shared on Facebook by a member of the public with the comment "ya daft racist", believed to be a reference to a scene from the Alan Partridge series,. This comment was highlighted in the chat by Callum Ringer, a Lib Dem councillor. Mr Sims responded saying: "Should we be calling people racist?!?"" Screenshots of the leaked WhatsApp messages in a North Norfolk Liberal Democrat general election chat between Richard Sims and other members (Image: WhatsApp) This prompted a young activist of Middle Eastern heritage to reply, saying: "Also, Reform is literally racist". When challenged by Mr Sims, she shared a screenshot of Reform's manifesto, where the party called for the banning of critical race theory being taught in schools and for the definition of a hate crime to be changed. Mr Sims then replied: "So you would be happy with female oppression?" The exchange continued to get heated, with the activist questioning if the "Lib Dems are the right party for you if you're saying stuff like that" and added that she found his comments "very concerning" as she had Muslim relatives. The conversation continued with other people in the chat attempting to intervene and calm the situation, including Mr Aquarone, who said: "We've come this far folks, let's take a breather and not fight on here please." Steffan Aquarone intervened as the disagreement continued (Image: WhatsApp) The activist then said: "I won't be treated like I'm the problem and won't stand for someone being openly hateful." Mr Sims then questioned her views, saying: "Liberal, as in accepting everyone's choices or thoughts? Or just accepting yours? So much for all-inclusiveness." Leaked WhatsApp messages from the Liberal Democrat's North Norfolk general election chat (Image: WhatsApp) The row ended with both individuals being removed from the group, with Mr Aquarone later sending an individual message to Mr Sims explaining he had been removed to put an end to the quarrel. BREXIT DISCORD Following the incident, Mr Sims said he took offence at Reform - which was previously the Brexit Party - being called racist. He believed the attack on Reform was also an attack on himself as a Brexit supporter.Richard Sims being pelted with wet sponges while locked in stocks for a charity event in 2015 (Image: Archant Norfolk 2015) He said: "If they are going to say Reform is racist then that implies the 58.9pc of people in North Norfolk who voted to leave are also racist. "It is not an all-inclusive party if they cannot accept people voting for Brexit. "Just because we want controlled immigration it does not make us racist." Duncan Baker, Conservative candidate for North Norfolk (Image: Stuart Anderson) North Norfolk is a key target for the Liberal Democrats and recent polls have predicted the party will beat the Tories by a slim margin. The party has long been vocal about its opposition to Brexit, with stopping leaving the EU a key point of its manifesto in 2019. Mr Patchett, the Reform candidate, criticised the Lib Dems for suggesting he and his voters were racist. "I get lots of comments on the doorstep, but those who aren't going to vote for me just say I'm not their cup of tea, not that I am racist." Mr Aquarone has sided with the activist in the party row. He said: "I think Reform's mode of operation is to divide us, so I will not say they are racist as that plays in to their narrative of division. "I think Reform are offering cheap solutions to real feelings that are held by some of the electorate." He added: "Earlier this week Richard shared some views in a conversation with a young activist of Middle Eastern heritage that didn't align with our party's values. "We are a broad church, however any racism - including many of the hidden tropes of racism - is not acceptable to me or the party. "We were unable to reach Richard after the incident although internal procedures were under way." The other candidates standing at the General Election for North Norfolk are: Duncan Baker for the Conservatives, Labour's Cathy Cordiner-Achenbach, Elizabeth Anne Dixon for the Green Party and Jason Patchett for Reform. Load-Date: June 21, 2024  End of Document
