   Macron faces his own Brexit moment, says Barnier; EU's Brexit negotiator claims France's president did not heed his warning after UK voted to leave The Sunday Telegraph (London) June 23, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 18 Length: 557 words Byline: Joe Barnes Body   EMMANUEL MACRON has driven his country to the brink of its very own Brexit moment, the EU's chief Brexit negotiator has said. In an interview with The Sunday Telegraph, Michel Barnier said: "I regret that in my country that this warning has not been listened to… about migration, security, authority of the state, and the respect and development of the poorest parts of the country." The first chapter of Mr Barnier's memoir was written as a warning that other countries could quit the European Union if lessons were not learned from Brexit. Shortly after leaving his role as the bloc's chief Brexit negotiator, he handed a copy to Mr Macron. But three years later, Mr Barnier believes the French president has not heeded his warning. "The first chapter was written precisely in the spirit of what could happen in [France]," he added. "It is my conviction that we have to pay huge attention and great respect to what people on the ground think in some very poor regions. That was the case in the UK, and I think it could be the same in France." Mr Macron chose to dissolve parliament and hold snap elections after his centrist alliance was trounced by the hard-Right in a European parliamentary vote earlier this month. The French president is gambling that he can beat Marine Le Pen's hard-Right National Rally. If his party loses, he would be forced to appoint a prime minister from another party in an arrangement known as a "cohabitation", leaving him with little power over domestic affairs with three years remaining as president. Mr Barnier, a prominent pro-European conservative in France, described the gamble as "very risky". "It's always risky to take a decision that nobody understands... in reality it is very risky in France to take a decision that nobody understands," he said. "We have to be very careful about what could happen in France." A recent opinion poll gave Ms Le Pen a clear lead with 34 per cent of the vote ahead of the first round of voting on June 30, followed by 29 per cent for the hastily cobbled Leftist alliance, New Popular Front, with Mr Macron's centrists on 22 per cent. If the National Rally wins, Ms Le Pen will likely hand the prime minister's seat to her 28-year-old protege, Jordan Bardella. The latter told business leaders this week he would cut France's EU budget payments by up to (EURO)3 billion (£2.5 billion). Many of Mr Barnier's pro-European contemporaries have dismissed the threat of Euroscepticism since Brexit. Ms Le Pen has sought to tone down its anti-EU "Frexit" rhetoric but Mr Barnier warned that France should not be complacent about her Eurosceptic intentions, even if she has dropped previous pledges to take the country out of the EU and its euro single currency. "I don't think Ms Le Pen and Mr Bardella changed their minds. They are still anti-European," he said. But not all hope is lost for Mr Macron, with the current Harris projections not giving National Rally an overall majority in the 577-seat National Assembly. Candidates must secure 12.5 per cent of registered voters in order to qualify for a second round of voting on July 7. While advisers to Mr Macron had feared they risked being squeezed out of a majority of the second-round runoffs, political analysts from OpinionWay said candidates from his party were more likely than socialists to beat hard-Right candidates at this stage. Load-Date: June 23, 2024  End of Document
