   Making Brexit an election issue won't work; Scots realise leaving the EU has altered the independence prospectus in ways the SNP still refuses fully to recognise The Times (London) June 3, 2024 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 21 Length: 1040 words Byline: Iain Macwhirter Body   Not even the most ardent nationalist would claim that John Swinney has had a successful election so far. The Michael Matheson affair, dire opinion polls, Operation Branchform and the SNP's apparent lack of funds are only some of the mishaps. Still, it is early days. And to be fair there are signs that the SNP's opinion poll slide could be halting. Monday's first TV debate will be a chance for the party leader to get on to the front foot, assuming he knows where that is, and assuming he doesn't turn it into another indefensible defence of the disgraced Matheson. So the last thing Swinney needs, as he relaunches his campaign, is the revelation that the Scottish government is to hand back £450 million of EU money. The cash is in so-called "structural" funding which the Scottish government has somehow failed to spend. This comes at the same time as the SNP leader condemns Westminster for "austerity, Brexit and a cost of living crisis". One can imagine the surprise of faceless Brussels bureaucrats, not exactly renowned for their own budgetary probity, at this uninvited rebate. "Those crazy Scots: is this a joke or are they trying to bribe us into letting them into the single market?" Nope. It looks like plain old budgetary incompetence. As revealed by The Sunday Times, the unspent £450 million was earmarked for things like rural economic regeneration and poverty reduction. And it isn't small change. The Scottish government is handing back more than five times the sum raised by Yousaf's tax raid last year. The new advanced rate of income tax on those earning more than £75,000 is expected to yield less than £80 million. So much for the SNP leader's promise to "eradicate child poverty". Other regions of the United Kingdom are underspent too but not on this scale. Scotland is handing back 28 per cent of its structure fund allocation. Wales will hand back 9 per cent and Northern Ireland just 2 per cent by the funding deadline. The Scottish government disputes the figures, of course, and says the true underspend won't be known until 2025. But since the scheme ends this month they're going to have to get their skates on if they want to spend nearly half a billion pounds in 30 days. Structural funding is for specific projects that have to be approved by the Brussels machine. It's not just a bag of cash that can be tossed into the kitty. So it looks very much as if Swinney's bid to make Brexit a general election issue is not going to work - at least in the short term. The nationalists had hoped to reignite the wrath of those 60 per cent of Scots who voted to remain in the EU in 2016. But Brexit has so far been the dog that didn't bark in this election. Indeed, it is hard to recall just how much it dominated the last general election. "Get Brexit Done," cried Boris Johnson, who was clearly on to a winner. The Conservatives won a near landslide majority as Labour's red wall seats in the north of England tumbled. The SNP didn't do too badly either, returning 48 seats in Scotland making it the third largest party in the House of Commons. This time round Brexit has hardly registered in the campaign. Sir Keir Starmer clearly believes it is best to keep shtum about his post-election plans for Europe. He is still wary of reminding voters that, until the day before yesterday, he was calling for a repeat referendum. The Labour leader has even ditched the promise he made to Labour members when he was elected leader to restore freedom of movement in the EU. There have been hints about allowing young people to have visafree travel in Europe but nothing specific. The Scottish Labour leader, Anas Sarwar, has been keeping quiet about Brexit too, probably because he isn't quite sure what he's allowed to say. However, he will surely be full throated in Monday's STV debate. "An utter disgrace!" is how Sarwar describes The Sunday Times story. "While Scots struggle," he goes on, "SNP incompetence means almost half a billion that could have been spent has been handed back." The Scottish Tory leader wasn't going to be left out of this clamour of condemnation. "This is waste and negligence on an unforgivable scale," opined Douglas Ross. "The SNP slogan should be Squander for Scotland." That may sound just a tad hypocritical from a party, the Conservatives, who managed to lose several times the SNP underspend in fraud during the Covid furlough scheme alone. And those with long memories may recall how the Labour first minister, Jack McConnell, was annually chastised for underspending his Barnett Formula money in botched "end year flexibilities". But two (or three) wrongs don't make a right. And timing is everything in politics. This gives the opposition parties an in to an issue that has barely figured in the 2024 election so far. Like the aftermath of a family row at Christmas, there has perhaps been a reluctance by the unionist parties to reopen old sores. In truth no one really knows whether Brexit has been a disaster or not. Leaving the EU meant a sharp drop in UK goods exports, but invisible exports, like financial services, seem to have grown encouragingly. Immigration, while still a hot button election issue, is no longer tied to the EU. The small boats problem has been repatriated. And with the war in Ukraine there's been a kind of rhetorical détente with Brussels as European countries focus on how to combat Putin's imperialism and cope with the energy crisis. Actually, Swinney too has every reason to move on from Brexit, and not just because of the lost £450 million. While they may not like Brexit, Scottish voters realise that it has fundamentally altered the independence prospectus in ways that the SNP still refuses fully to recognise. Now Britain is out of the EU, there would have to be a hard border against Scotland's biggest trading partner, England. In order to rejoin the EU, an independent Scotland would have to set up the machinery of an independent Scottish currency with all the uncertainty that brings to investment and pensions. Indeed, as Labour will no doubt say in the TV debate, Scottish independence looks increasingly like Brexit on stilts. Brexit has so far been the dog that didn't bark in this election The SNP hoped to appeal to those Scots who voted to remain Graphic    John Swinney's government is having to return £450 million of EU funding Load-Date: June 3, 2024  End of Document
