   Most Brits say it was a mistake to leave EU; Britain 'Brexit Regret' The Age (Melbourne, Australia) July 1, 2024 Monday Print & First Editions  Copyright 2024 The Age Company Limited All Rights Reserved Section: WORLD; Pg. 19 Length: 691 words Byline: Rob Harris Body   London: In early June, there was a contemporary twist for British paratroopers recreating the airborne part of the battle to liberate France by jumping into the D-Day drop zone in Normandy. They were met by French customs and passport control. Videos of border checks in a field went viral on social media showing the paratroopers at a makeshift post - a desk, with a passport scanner and two laptops, manned by French officials. While Britain was never part of the passport-free Schengen travel zone, the online reaction to footage of soldiers queueing for their arrival stamps summed up the Brexit divide. Many are still bitter about Britain's exit from the EU, while others saw it as a chance to mock the French zest for rules. Eight years on from the Brexit referendum, and over four since Britain finally left the EU, the issue continues to generate headlines and spark debate. It is played out on high streets with shuttered stores and with queues at airports. There remains much talk of "Brexit regret", especially among Leave voters, who won the referendum by a margin of 1,269,501 votes: 51.89 per cent to 48.11 per cent. About 65 per cent of Britons in several polls say that, in hindsight, leaving the EU was a bad move. Just 15 per cent say the benefits have so far outweighed the costs. The 2016 vote was carried over the line by a muddled combination of promises of economic benefit, more money to spend on critical services and lower rates of immigration, by men now viewed by some as charlatans, such as former prime minister Boris Johnson and Reform UK leader Nigel Farage. Farage himself now says Brexit has "failed" - but he puts the blame on the Conservative government. Research by UK in a Changing Europe, a think-tank, found the most common reasons people feel Brexit is going poorly are economic: increased prices, staff shortages and a weaker economy more generally. This is the case for both Remain and Leave voters. Several research papers have found voters feel negatively about the course Brexit has taken. Even among Leavers, less than one in five feel that Brexit is going well, although most seem hesitant about making a definitive assessment. Most blame the decision itself; others blame the British government for not taking better advantage of it; and still others say Brexit suffered from bad luck as it took effect shortly before the pandemic and the Ukraine war. The Brexit vote in June 2016 was the first in a series of populist earthquakes to rock Western politics. It was soon followed by the election of Donald Trump. Both will go down in history as revolts by those who felt left behind by globalisation, taken for granted by traditional politicians and looked down on by urban elites. Both set in motion forces that are still playing out. According to Ipsos' latest monthly "issues index", immigration is only the fourth most important issue for Britons. Its latest survey of 1035 adults suggests the most important issue is the economy (34 per cent) followed by the National Health Service (29 per cent) and inflation (27 per cent). Immigration was mentioned by 24 per cent of respondents. Goldman Sachs estimates the British economy is now 5 per cent smaller than it otherwise would have been without Brexit, although some say it is hard to separate that from the effects of the pandemic and the war in Ukraine. The National Institute of Economic and Social Research, a British think tank, estimated that Brexit has resulted in a lost annual income per capita of £850 ($1600) since 2020. While the anti-Brexit mood of most voters is clear, that does not translate into a wish to fight old battles again. No mainstream leader is brave enough to concede that it's failed, let alone promise to reverse the decision. Professor Michael Gasiorek, from Chatham House, says while Britain may have notionally taken back control over areas such as migration, as Brexit campaigners said it would, the evidence shows leaving the EU had negatively affected the economy. "It is pretty clear why the Conservatives don't want to talk about the EU. Brexit has offered few economic advantages, nor have migration levels come down," he said. Load-Date: June 30, 2024  End of Document
