   Mr. Brexit is back; Right-wing populist Nigel Farage once campaigned for the UK to leave the EU. Now he wants to make it into parliament. His chances are better than ever Die Welt am Sonntag (English) June 23, 2024 Sunday  Copyright 2024 Axel Springer GmbH All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Pg. 8; No. 25 Length: 1195 words Byline: Mandoline Rutkowski Body      Clacton-on-Sea With the song "Without Me ", rapper Eminem built on his early successes in 2002. And it is precisely this song that plays as the British right-wing populist Nigel Farage strides through a theater in his Clacton-on-Sea constituency in front of around 800 cheering supporters. "Guess who's back, back again", the chorus of the Eminem song echoes from the loudspeakers. There is only one answer to this question at this moment: Farage is back - and campaigning. As he takes to the stage, fireworks spray a bright yellow shower of sparks. A surprise effect that symbolizes the unpredictable politician. As recently as May, Farage had denied rumors of a candidacy in the British House of Commons elections on 4 July. A few days later, however, he announced that he would not only stand as a candidate, but also take over the chairmanship of the Reform UK party he founded once again. Farage has run for parliament eight times without success, but now his chances are better than ever. According to the polls, he is ahead of his rivals in his constituency. Since its foundation six years ago, when it was still known as the Brexit Party, Reform UK has climbed up to 19 percent. In a recent poll, the party was even ahead of the incumbent Conservative government of Prime Minister Rishi Sunak. Farage then unceremoniously named Reform UK as the new "opposition party" to the leading Labour Party, thereby reaffirming his declared aim of bringing down the Conservatives. But he also has the Social Democrats under Keir Starmer in his sights. "They'll be scared of me when I'm done with them," he celebrated to the cheering crowd in the south-east English coastal town. Without reading off the page and standing casually next to the lectern, Farage settles accounts with the established parties in the almost full hall. "Britain is broken ", he rages. The Conservatives had cheated on Brexit, immigration was at record levels, waiting lists for doctors' appointments were scandalously long and property prices were going through the roof. Only Reform UK offers real solutions, the leader proclaimed when he presented the party platform the day before: zero immigration, billions in tax relief, withdrawal from international institutions and a backwards role in climate protection policy were just some of the grandiose promises that experts later described as unworkable. On this evening in Clacton, Farage is above all on a charm offensive: he makes the crowd laugh, asks open questions to the audience and responds spontaneously to shouts. Pure entertainment. In the many years of his political career, Farage has become a leading figure on the British right. The Londoner, who was born in 1964 and worked as a stockbroker before his political career, made a name for himself as "Mr. Brexit" because he tirelessly propagated that the UK would be better off outside the EU. As a schoolboy, he initially joined the Conservative Party, but its positions soon no longer went far enough for the EU and immigration critic. In his biography "One Party After Another ", author Michael Crick writes, citing contemporary witnesses, that Farage had already shown sympathy for Adolf Hitler and the right-wing conservative anti-immigration politician Enoch Powell as a schoolboy. In the early 1990s, Farage left the Conservative Party after the signing of the Maastricht Treaty, which formed the basis for the European Union, and founded the United Kingdom Independence Party (Ukip) as a counter-movement. In the 2014 European elections, Ukip became the strongest British party with 27.5 percent. This result gave it the momentum to push then Prime Minister David Cameron to hold a referendum on remaining in the EU. In the run-up to the referendum, Farage campaigned against Eastern European workers in particular, stylizing them as criminal social parasites. The narrative caught on - the British voted for Brexit. After achieving his goal, Farage left the party in 2018 as a result of internal party disputes and continued his anti-European course by re-founding the Brexit Party. Three years ago, he resigned and handed over the chairmanship to real estate tycoon Richard Tice, who led the party under the name Reform UK until the end. Instead of being at the center of political events, he commented on them as the presenter of his own show on the right-wing private channel "GB News". In recent months, however, he has fueled the rumor mill with subtle hints of a return to the political stage. Last year, he competed on the British equivalent of the reality show "I'm a star - get me out of here!" and once again surprised everyone with how far he would go for a bit of the limelight. The British media gratefully seized on the speculation, as the populist offered a far more exciting profile than the indifferent to boring top politicians Prime Minister Sunak and Labour leader Starmer. The cult of personality surrounding Farage drives his party's well-oiled PR machine. Even the party manifesto reflects this strategy. The cover picture shows a cool, sacrosanct Farage in a suit, hiding his cell phone in his jacket in cinematic secret agent style. According to forecasts, the Reform Party will only be able to send a handful of MPs to London due to the majority voting system, according to which only the candidate with the most votes enters the House of Commons. However, even this could rearrange the political balance of power. The main sufferers would be the Conservatives, who could lose the most voters to Farage's Reform UK. But the Labour Party, which will in all likelihood form the new government, would also come under pressure after the victory. This is because convincing speakers like Farage, democratically legitimized, could help set the agenda in the House of Commons with their issues instead of intervening from the sidelines as they have done up to now. Whether this happens will be decided on July 4. The party is putting forward over 600 candidates in the elections. A look at the past bodes well for Farage's chances in Clacton-On-Sea: a majority voted for Brexit in the district of 53,000 inhabitants. However, like everywhere else in the country, the politician has opponents here too, claiming he is a "racist, fascist and misogynist ". At the election rally, bags are thoroughly checked and muscle-bound security personnel guard the hall during his speech. A precautionary measure, as a local resident had thrown a milkshake in his face during his first appearance in Clacton at the beginning of June. There are no drinks flying this evening, all eyes are fixed on the 60-year-old. Could this man one day become prime minister, as he envisions in five years' time? "That would be brilliant," says one visitor. "Look at his party manifesto! Those would be good times for Britain." They'll be scared of me when I'm done with them Nigel Farage, leader of the Reform UK party Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word.   Document original Graphic    A Brit through and through: Nigel Farage even wears socks with the Union Jack Load-Date: June 22, 2024  End of Document
