   New Brexit checks to cost businesses 2 billion, report finds The National (Scotland) April 11, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 354 words Byline: Laura Pollock Body   IMPORT controls coming into force at the end of April are set to cost businesses across the UK 2 billion and fuel higher inflation, according to a recent report. The report by Allianz Trade has said the post-Brexit border checks, due to come into force on April 30, could add 10% to import costs over the first year and have a knock on effect to damage UK-EU trade. It comes after Labour ruled out renegotiating the Brexit deal and said they were -committed to making Brexit work.- Businesses have warned they are still in the dark over how the process will work with less than a month to go and that the new Brexit checks would drive up food prices and disproportionately hit small businesses. This includes a recent call from the managing director of Scotland-s largest independent dairy to the UK Government to rethink its post-Brexit labelling scheme. READ MORE: Bid to build 125 metre high wind turbine rejected by Scottish council Scotland has already lost up to 100 million a year in salmon exports to the EU because of red tape and increased costs associated with Brexit. The SNP-s Europe and EU accession spokesperson Alyn Smith MP reacted to the report and said following the recent denial from Labour that they plan to re-enter the customs union if they win the General Election, the party has "made it clear things won't change under a UK Labour government". -With Labour and the Tories both committed to Brexit, independence is the only way for Scotland to re-join the EU single market and customs union to stop the onslaught of Brexit. -Brexit has been a disaster from the beginning with businesses and household budgets in Scotland paying the price for Brexit and Tory government policies - none of which we voted for. -Every week we see further evidence that Brexit isn-t working, indeed it is actively damaging businesses and our economy. But Sir Keir Starmer has made it clear things won-t change under a UK Labour government. -The SNP are the only party offering the people of Scotland an escape from broken Brexit Britain and a route back into the EU - and the world's largest single market - through independence.- Load-Date: April 11, 2024  End of Document
