   Nigel Farage: The return of the Brexit architect who threatens to sink the Conservative Party in the U.K. CE Noticias Financieras English June 16, 2024 Sunday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1444 words Body   "So far, it's the most bland and boring election campaign we've ever seen in our lifetimes. And it's funny, because the more the two big party leaders try to be different, the more they sound the same". With these words, the populist British politician Nigel Farage announced on Monday, June 3, his intention to run in the UK general election. The Euroskeptic, who led the campaign for the exit in the 2016 UK referendum on the European Union, said he is running for a parliamentary seat in Clacton-on-Sea, a coastal town in the east of England, which registered strong support for Brexit. Farage's plan was to run in this modest seaside town in Essex, 88 kilometers northeast of London, one of the few places that has previously elected a member of Parliament for one of its predecessor anti-European parties. But the Conservative majority he has to topple is some 24,702 voters. When he made the announcement to return to lead the Reform UK party pundits thought it would be a failure, as he has never managed to become an MP, despite standing seven times. However, with less than three weeks to go until the general election, Westminster observers are openly speculating whether the collective could destroy the Conservatives altogether. This, because in a further blow to beleaguered Prime Minister Rishi Sunak, a YouGov poll for The Times put Reform UK on 19% of voting intentions, compared to 18% for the Conservatives, who have been ruling the country for 14 years. The results were known moments before a debate on the ITV channel between leading figures from the seven main parties. Farage wasted no time in boasting about the poll, saying in his opening statement, "Just before we went on air, we overtook the Conservatives in the national opinion polls. We are now the opposition to Labour," he warned. In a twist of Conservative campaign rhetoric, he also claimed that voting for the Conservatives instead of Reform UK would allow Labour to govern. For his part, Will Jennings, a polling analyst at Sky News, said the YouGov poll "represents a moment of enormous danger for the Conservatives." "Because of the geography of their support, reformers are not projected to win many seats, but they could still cost the Conservatives victories in closely contested seats across the country," he said. "In many places this will make the difference between a constituency gaining a Conservative or Labour MP," he added For his part, a spokesman for Reform UK told Sky News that "one poll does not make an election." "However, it is clear that the Conservatives are ruined, just as they have ruined the country," he said. "At the moment, Labour will win, but reformers are the only real opposition," he added. "Those who are thinking of voting Conservative out of unwarranted loyalty should think again. They can and should vote for a party with the energy and imagination to challenge a Labour hegemony," he argued. True to his style, Farage has not missed the opportunity to mock the Conservatives, especially the prime minister, Rishi Sunak, and recently did so using a song by rapper Eminem. In a video released on his X (formerly Twitter) account, Farage is shown sitting in the back of his car listening to the 2002 song by the American singer Without Me before repeating the lyrics "Guess who's back." And the tweet tagged none other than Sunak. At a press conference earlier this month, Farage claimed that the country was facing an "immigration choice," although he exaggerated the number of people arriving to settle, claiming that all those who entered the UK to work or study in the last year intended to stay permanently. In a column published by The Times, former Tory MP Matthew Parris expressed concern about the rise Farage has enjoyed. And he noted that the architect of Brexit "will only lead the Conservatives to the end of the pier." "Mimicking the populist Reform party is a one-way ticket to annihilation," he wrote. "In his attempts to get so-called conservatives on his side, Sunak has given up the sympathy of hundreds of MPs and millions of tolerant, thoughtful, centrist voters across Britain who have no time for socialism, but are repelled by a curdled conservatism, cowering at the mere name of that Farage imposter," he said. Bad time for Conservatives The Conservative Party has been in power since 2010, but under Sunak's leadership has slipped in the polls and are 20 percentage points behind Labour, according to an average of opinion polls. These estimate it would win just 140 of 650 parliamentary seats, its worst result since 1906. The UK's first-past-the-post electoral system makes it very difficult for smaller parties to win seats, even if they win a significant proportion of the vote. But if Farage manages to get elected to the House of Commons and get enough votes for his party to receive state funding, that could be enough of a launch pad to blow the right wing out of British politics. "The Conservatives have done a terrible job," Richard Tice, the billionaire businessman and former leader who is helping to fund the Reform UK party, told the U.S.-based Politico. "They have wrecked Britain and they must be punished." "Our task is to present a serious alternative to the British people. This is a serious, medium-term plan to replace the Conservatives and become the opposition to the Labour Party," he said. In this election on Thursday, July 4, Farage has a sort of blood in his eye with the Conservatives. This, because in the 2019 election, his then Brexit Party agreed not to field candidates in hundreds of seats to safeguard a Conservative victory. He has since accused the collective of failing the political right and said Monday it was time for a "rebellion." "What I am really calling for - or what I intend to lead - is a political revolt," he said at a so-called emergency press conference in London. Farage has made clear his plans to replace the Conservatives as the official opposition if Labour wins in a landslide, as current polls predict. He has ruled out striking a pact with the Conservatives after prominent Tory Suella Braverman said her party should back the former UKIP leader because she believes "there really isn't much difference between him and many of the policies we stand for." Reform UK was formed in 2020 from the remnants of Farage's previous project, the Brexit Party, which itself had been formed from the remnants of UKIP. Not an ordinary party, in fact, Reform was set up as a limited liability company, with Farage as majority shareholder and honorary chairman. Until recently, Politico noted, it could barely afford full-time staff members and had no headquarters. Gawain Towler, a former UKIP MEP and onetime Farage lieutenant, ran operations from his home outside London. While other parties relied on internal polls and focus groups, Reform relied on a single nerdy activist - Alex Wilson, nicknamed the "John Curtice of Reform" (a reference to a well-known British polling guru) because of his penchant for data and spreadsheets. "While Reform had experienced several significant boosts over the previous year - good results in a handful of parliamentary by-elections and the high-profile defection of former Conservative party vice-chairman Lee Anderson - it still suffered from obscurity beyond the Westminster bubble," Politico noted. Farage himself admitted to the portal that Reform needed some work. The threat to the Conservatives was always clear. Both the Brexit Party and UKIP had made significant gains against the Conservatives during the 2010s, forcing the party to veer to the right in response. In the view of experts, that would have been partly why Sunak called an early election, because he was looking to surprise Reform UK at a time when the party lacked the structure and resources to pose a serious threat. At first it appeared that the gamble had paid off. Farage announced he would not stand for election and said there was no time to build a winning campaign. He preferred to focus on the U.S. presidential campaign, he said, where he has been a regular cheerleader for his friend Donald Trump. Up to that point, the 2024 election had promised to be a battle of the nerds. But since Farage's change of heart he has spiced up the election and, according to the BBC, Labour privately says it is delighted with the populist's presence because he can split the Conservative vote. This, even if Reform does not win any seats, because if the right-wing vote splits in some constituencies, especially in the most marginal ones, it would be a big problem for the Tories, since Farage has the ability to influence Conservative policy, even without a seat in the House of Commons. Load-Date: June 17, 2024  End of Document
