   Nigel Farage shares his 'Brexit club classics' Spotify playlist standard.co.uk June 3, 2024 Monday 11:49 AM EST  Copyright 2024 Evening Standard Limited  All Rights Reserved  Section: MUSIC BUSINESS NEWS, European Internet news & UK POLITICS NEWS Length: 377 words Byline: Claudia Cockerell Body   Every leader has their signature anthem. D:Ream's Things Can Only Get Better was the soundtrack to Tony Blair's election campaign in 1997, while Theresa May unforgettably jigged out to ABBA's Dancing Queen at the Tory party conference in 2018. But what is the soundtrack to Nigel Farage and Reform UK's campaign to "make Britain great"? Residents of Ashfield in the East Midlands were rudely awoken on Saturday morning by the sound of club anthems blasting from an open top bus. Riding on the top deck was Farage himself, who was out campaigning with Lee Anderson, the Labour-turned-Tory-turned-Reform UK MP for Ashfield.  "It's Saturday morning, don't lounge around in bed, get out, campaigning to Nigel Farage's Brexit Club Classics!" the former UKIP leader shouted, brandishing a Spotify playlist on his phone in a video posted on X. We all love a few Brexit Club Classics on a Saturday morning.  pic.twitter.com/5MjFmnAKJz - Nigel Farage (@Nigel_Farage) June 1, 2024 The playlist in question has racked up over 6000 likes on Spotify and was created by a user called Scott with 20 followers. It has nearly six hours of club bangers, charts music and 80s disco. Some of Nigel Farage's Brexit Club Classics include "Out of touch," the Uniting Nations cover of the Hall and Oates original, "Acceptable in the 80s" by Calvin Harris, and "Better the devil you know" by Kylie Minogue.  Other big hitters on the playlist include Swedish House Mafia, Lady Gaga and Groove Armada. Four of Fatboy Slim's are considered Brexit bangers, even though he once DJ'ed at a protest in London calling for a second referendum.  Farage and Anderson made a speech to locals gathered at the Rifle Volunteer pub. They got a better turnout than last time, when only a handful of people showed up to watch Anderson ride around town with Reform leader Richard Tice. After saying he wouldn't return to politics in time for the 4th of July election, Farage has teased an "Emergency General Election announcement" at 4pm today. Was he double bluffing all along? Read More Nigel Farage fuels speculation with 'emergency' General Election announcement Politicians and music: Which songs have been used and do they need permission? Treasury sells another £1.24bn of NatWest shares as election delays retail sale Load-Date: June 28, 2024  End of Document
