   Nigel Farage, Trump ally and Brexit advocate, shakes up UK politics again. CE Latin America Migration English June 26, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 ContentEngineLLC All Rights Reserved Length: 1366 words Byline: Amalia Camarillo Body    The crowd of 800 cheered as fireworks lit up the theater stage in Clacton-on-Sea, a fading English seaside town, and lyrics from an Eminem song boomed, "Guess who's back, again?" The answer is Nigel Farage, a supporter of former President Donald J. Trump, Brexit advocate and Britain's best-known politician, who is leading an insurgent new party that criticizes immigration and promises to change the next British general election. Never before elected to the British Parliament, Mr. Farage is running to represent the Clacton area, and opinion polls suggest he has a solid chance of winning. "The establishment is terrified, the Conservatives are terrified," Mr. Farage gleefully declared, referring to the ruling party, which is trailing in opinion polls ahead of the July 4 election. Britain "is a broken nation," he added in a speech attacking everything from asylum seekers to the BBC. A polarizing and pugilistic figure and a highly skilled communicator, Mr. Farage, 60, helped the Conservatives win a landslide victory in the last general election by not running candidates from his Brexit Party in certain key areas. This time his plan is quite different. He wants to destroy the Torys by snatching much of their vote, then replacing them or taking control of the remnants of the party. Early in the campaign, after a journalist asked him if he wanted to merge Reform with the Conservatives, he replied, "More like a takeover, dear friend." Mr. Farage has tried and failed seven times to get elected to the British Parliament, and his party, Reform UK, is unlikely to win more than a handful of seats under an electoral system that punishes small parties. But for two decades he has shaped the political conversation in Britain, pushing the Brexit cause, outmaneuvering the Torys and pushing them further to the right. A victory in Clacton could anoint him as a power broker in the battle for the soul of the Conservative Party. In an interview last week at his campaign office in Clacton over an arcade, Mr. Farage was relaxed and confident, joking and clearly enjoying his return to front-line politics. "What we look at is Canada in '93 where Reform actually took over the existing Conservative party," Mr. Farage said, referring to the 1993 election when another insurgent party, after which Reform UK is named, helped crush the established Progressive Conservatives. "That's a possible model," he said, adding that, alternatively, Reform could grow organically over the next five years. 'End of the line' Clacton is the last stop on a train line in northeast London. Its history has been intertwined with Mr. Farage's since 2014, when a Conservative lawmaker, Douglas Carswell, switched to the populist UK Independence Party, which at the time was led by Mr. Farage. Mr. Carswell was re-elected, becoming one of two lawmakers to have represented UKIP in the British Parliament. The town, which had high levels of unemployment and poverty, became a focus for policymakers and columnists trying to understand the wave of populist politics. In 2016, Clacton voted by nearly 70 percent to leave the European Union. Mr. Farage told me that Clacton was "the end of the line" but also a place where people "feel very, very English, really identify with being English, and obviously there's some mourning for the glory days of the seaside." In 2019, Giles Watling, a Conservative, was elected with 72 percent of the vote. In normal times, his majority of 25,000 would be almost unassailable. But these are not normal times for the Conservatives. And in the 2019 election, Mr. Farage's Brexit Party did not show up here. Mr. Watling did not respond to interview requests, but Chris Griffiths, a Conservative activist, acknowledged that Mr. Farage "had livened up what was probably going to be a very dull campaign." Maurice Alexander, another Conservative activist, whose parents came to Britain from Belgium around the time of World War II, was less positive about Mr. Farage. "He scares me," he said. Immigration featured prominently in Mr. Farage's Clacton speech, as it does in most of his speeches. "Our quality of life has declined for everyone as a result of this population explosion," he thundered, adding, "The time has come to stand up and say 'enough is enough!" 'The consequences of what he says have results' Earlier in the day, Labor Party candidate Jovan Owusu-Nepaul was knocking on doors. "There's a lot of anti-Farage, there's a lot of pro-Farage," said Mr. Owusu-Nepaul, 27, who was born in Birmingham and has Ghanaian and Jamaican heritage. He said voter reception had been mostly positive, but he was also sometimes the victim of "dog-whistle stuff that Farage has been quite effective at using." That same day, he was told, "Go home, we don't want you here, immigrants out," he recalled. "I think Farage's arrival here has inflamed a level of tension," he added. "The consequences of what he says have results, and they have results for people like me, they have results for people like my friends, they have results for people who I don't even know exist in this country, but who will be tormented by the kind of rhetoric he espouses." Mr. Farage criticized a 2019 social media conversation in which an American student posted: "Going into 2020, I will still be vocal about addressing racism and the fact that I drink white men's tears on a regular basis." Mr. Owusu-Nepaul responded to the comment with, "My favorite drink." Mr. Owusu-Nepaul said his comment was a joke, taken out of context. On the morning of his rally, Mr. Farage visited a veterans' breakfast club in Clacton where he enjoyed a full breakfast of bacon, fried bread, black pudding and beans. "He's listening to veterans, he knows what we want," said David Bye, who served in the navy and organizes the club. Other supporters include Lynn Tuckwell, a retired beautician who attended a later meeting. A Brexit voter, she said she was disappointed with the results but did not blame Mr. Farage. "It wasn't Nigel's fault, the Conservatives didn't deliver on Brexit. Nigel gave us Brexit, and he has come out of retirement to get us out of this mess." Domestically, Mr. Farage provokes disgust as well as admiration. After saying that the expansion of the European Union and NATO caused the war in Ukraine, he was heavily criticized across the political spectrum. Reform candidates have crossed other lines, with one saying that Britain should have remained neutral in the fight against the Nazis, and another using anti-Semitic tropes and claiming that Jewish groups were "agitating for the mass importation of Muslims into Britain." What kind of lawmaker Mr. Farage might be is uncertain. In a February interview with the London Times, when he was still considering running for Parliament, he mused, "Do I want to spend every Friday for the next five years in Clacton?" Mr. Farage said it was not an insult to the town, but a rhetorical question about his return to front-line politics. "I was saying that's the decision - a very important decision - and I've decided 'Yes.'" Mr. Carswell, now executive director of the Mississippi Center for Public Policy, believes Mr. Farage will likely win in Clacton, but urged him to focus on a detailed campaign. "You don't need to have a 1,000-person rally in a public hall," said Mr. Carswell, speaking by phone from the U.S., adding, "You need to persuade people who didn't come to your kickoff rally, persuade people who don't follow you on Facebook and social media." About two miles from Clacton-on-Sea is the village of Jaywick, once one of the most deprived parts of Britain and part of the area Mr. Farage is trying to represent. Terry Haggis, 66, who lives there, remembers the best vacation days in his youth. "I feel disappointed, this is a vacation town, when I was young it was full of life. Not enough money has been invested." Undecided on how to vote, he is leaning Conservative because he fears that voting Reform might benefit Labour. His other concern is that Clacton might help Mr. Farage more than the other way around. "My question is: Is he going to use it to advance his political career?" he said. "Is it a roundabout way of getting in and doing what he wants to do?" " Load-Date: June 27, 2024  End of Document
