   Nigel: I'll stop boats in 100 days; ELECTION 2024 REFORM LEADER UNVEILS PARTY'S 'CONTRACT' lVOW TO END CROSSINGS lSLASH TAX, LEAVE ECHR lPM BY 2030, SAYS FARAGE The Sun (England) June 18, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 966 words Byline: HARRY COLE ; THOMAS GODFREY ; NOA HOFFMAN Body   NIGEL Farage vowed to stop the boats, pull out of the European Court of Human Rights and pause all but essential immigration within 100 days of a Reform government. Insisting he could be PM by 2030, he called time on a "population explosion". He reckoned the party's election manifesto was all part of his "contract with the people" that also offered up billions in tax cuts. Despite declaring Britain "skint" Mr Farage proposed £141billion of extra spending plans ? with experts casting doubt on his sums. And the Conservatives warned he was opening the door to Labour being in power for decades. They blasted: "Labour are already planning to lower the voting age to 16, and we can expect votes for migrants, EU citizens, and prisoners to follow. So a vote for Reform won't mean five years of Labour, it would mean a generation." At the manifesto launch yesterday Brexit-backer Nigel, 60, declared his "unashamedly radical" party would offer "real, genuine change" in a dig at both Sir Keir Starmer and PM Rishi Sunak. The Reform leader, alongside its chairman Richard Tice, launched Our Contract With You in a rundown community centre in Merthyr Tydfil, South Wales. He said the decrepit building showed "exactly what happens to a country when Labour is in charge". It came hours after Mr Farage ? wearing Union Jack socks ? admitted he does have ambitions to be PM within five years. Reform's plans also include slashing income and corporation tax and cutting billions in woke public sector waste. The Army would expand to at least 100,000 troops from its current 300-year low of 73,000. And three per cent of GDP would go on defence ? half a point higher than the current target. This first big..our ambition 2029 election ? NIGEL FARAGE, Mr Farage also promised to radically reform the benefits trap, which he claimed "massively disincentives" going back to work. In a speech he conceded: "We're not pretending we're going to win this election. We are a relatively new party. This is step one. Our real ambition is the 2029 General Election. But this is our first big push." Blasting both big parties on migration, he fumed: "The reason millions voted for Brexit is we'd get back control of our borders. And none of that has happened. "In fact, the opposite has happened. push real is the yesterday "Some people say to me, 'Nigel, that's a failure of Brexit'. "It isn't. It's the failure of a sovereign government." Mr Farage claimed: "The only way to fully restore sovereignty and decide who can come in and who can stay is by leaving that European Court of Human Rights." On taxes, he said the tax-free personal allowance would rise to £20,000. Inheritance tax on estates worth under £2million and stamp duty on homes under £750,000 would be canned. And the VAT threshold for small firms would rise to £150,000 from £90,000. The cuts would be funded by £150billion in savings. These would include £50billion in "wasteful" government spending and slashing funds to universities that suppress free speech. Mr Farage's return to frontline politics two weeks ago has been repeatedly slammed by PM Rishi Sunak and other Tories. Yesterday, outgoing Tory big beast Michael Gove dismissed the Reform contract as "ridiculous". Former Prime Minister Lord Cameron claimed Mr Farage was using "inflammatory language" and suggesting "hopeless policy". Hitting back at claims he was sacrificing Brexit, Mr Farage told The Sun: "I didn't realise Lord Cameron was in favour of Brexit. "Those who supported Brexit like Suella Braverman have been remarkably nice about me. "And I think you'll find if things go the way I hope that that wing of the Conservative party ? literally only about 50 are real Brexiteers ? they'll find common cause with us." Meanwhile, Reform chairman Richard Tice said he was prepared to "have a major row with the French" if they refused to take back asylum seekers picked up while crossing the Channel. He told LBC talk radio: "Sometimes you have to have a row to get stuff done." harry.cole@thesun.co.uk IMMIGRATION AT A GLANCE DITCH the European Convention on Human Rights, with zero illegal immigrants resettled in the UK. A new Department of Immigration will return boat migrants to France. Ban on international students bringing dependents to Britain. TAX RAISE the minimum income tax threshold to £20,000, exempting six million people, and increase the higher 40p rate threshold to £70,000. Stamp duty scrapped for properties under £750,000, inheritance tax abolished for estates under £2million, VAT on energy bills removed, fuel duty lowered by 20p per litre, and VAT reduced to 18 per cent. POLICE ZERO-tolerance policing will see life imprisonment for drugrelated crimes and a substantial increase in stop-and-searches. EDUCATION A BAN on transgender ideology and the introduction of a patriotic curriculum in schools. Mandatory exclusions for all violent children. Offer of twoyear university courses. ENVIRONMENTNET Zero targets will be scrapped, saving £30billion annually, and new North Sea oil and gas licences will be fasttracked. HEALTH CUT NHS waiting lists to zero within two years and exempt two million frontline healthcare workers from basic rate income tax for three years to retain and attract staff. Patients to get vouchers for private treatment if NHS wait times are exceeded, with a 20 per cent tax relief on private healthcare. DEFENCE INCREASE defence spending to 2.5 per cent of national income within three years, and then to 3 per cent of GDP within six years. Recruitment of 30,000 full-timers into the Army. WELFARE A TWO-STRIKE rule for job seekers ? with benefits being withdrawn from people who repeatedly turn down work. low on a none has opposite happened. This is the first big push ...our real ambition is the 2029 election ? NIGEL FARAGE, YESTERDAY 'Nigel, a BREXIT'. he not "It failure Graphic    SOCK & AWE Nigel's patriotic socksMy big deal ... Farage outlines his vision for the UKManifesto . . Tice & Farage yesterday Load-Date: June 18, 2024  End of Document
