   Nigel Farage: "The 'Tories' have betrayed Brexit voters". CE Noticias Financieras English July 1, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 764 words Body   Enrique Rubio Clacton-on-Sea (UK), Jul 1 (EFE) - National populist Nigel Farage, who eight years after pushing for Britain's exit from the European Union has now turned the election campaign upside down, accuses the Conservatives of having betrayed those who voted for Brexit, in an exclusive interview with EFE. Polls give for the first time a seat to Farage, who is running in the July 4 elections as the candidate of his party, Reform UK, for the coastal town of Clacton-on-Sea, a bastion of the pro-Brexit vote where English nationalism oozes from every corner. His party is close to the Conservatives of the Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak, in voting intentions thanks to the emergence of Farage, who - after initially denying that he would run - is already postulating himself as the next head of the opposition. Farage has not changed. He maintains his provocative style, his incisive phrases and his contumacious rhetoric with which he seduced millions of Britons to say goodbye to the EU. Nor has his self-confidence deserted him. "If I'm inspired by Donald Trump, it's more like the other way around! I was already doing this many years before him," he explains to EFE during a door-to-door campaign visit in a residential neighborhood of Clacton. "The Tea Party, in the U.S., says they were the first insurgents. But I tell them, 'I've been doing this for 30 years, my first campaign was 30 years ago, and then I spent more than 20 years in the European Parliament. I've been in retirement four years and now I'm coming back? I must be crazy!". Outside one of the houses where he is being greeted as a hero, Farage explains that a family who all their lives have voted for the 'Tories' this time will vote for him: "They feel betrayed! The Conservatives were elected on a pro-Brexit platform to get what we wanted. And there were two clear things: one was border control and the other was to reduce regulation for business." In his view, Brexit has not failed: successive Conservative governments charged with implementing it since the referendum approved leaving the EU in 2016 have. That means that British freelancers and entrepreneurs are still to this day under EU regulations, "which are wonderful for big companies, but not at all for small ones." Farage unabashedly deploys the populist essences of the discourse that has led the far right to achieve major gains in recent elections in Europe, as happened this Sunday in France. "What is my message to the British living in Spain? Remember the old country. Remember what it was like. Remember the values it stood for and look how they are under threat," he says. With immigration as the main target of his diatribes, the Reform leader assures that his country has always been the most open in Europe to immigrants, but that the "population explosion" forces them to "draw a line". Farage presents himself as a radical. He said it when he presented his electoral program and repeats it every time he is asked. But he also has no objection to modulate his definition of "radical" depending on the interlocutor. "I am a radical in the definition of the 17th and 18th centuries in England. It's the people who wanted democracy, who wanted a parliament, fair elections and rules that ensured the rights of individuals," he says. For him, the word is currently used in a "pejorative sense", so he clarifies that he considers himself "a radical in the classical sense of the term". The supposed regeneration he advocates involves reforming a "barbaric and obsolete" electoral system, which favors Conservatives and Labour alternating in power thanks to the uninominal majority system, which distributes one seat per constituency only to the party with the most votes. "We should have a system like the Spanish one, with at least half of the Parliament elected on a proportional basis. And the (Upper) House of Lords is a corrupt abomination. You give five million to the Labour Party or the Tory Party and you become a lord - how can that still be happening!". Farage struggles to finish sentences in Clacton. Neighbors keep interrupting him to tell him they will vote for him. Around these parts he is a star, and he boasts that, "When I speak, they listen." His campaign has been complicated by racist and homophobic outbursts from some Reform activists. During the interview, a member of her security team tries to argue why Taylor Swift is a "very bad influence" on young women. But this is "ground zero" for Brexit and here the change is embodied by him. EFE er/vg/ah (Archival resources at www.lafototeca.com Code: 22107060, 22085448 et al.) Load-Date: July 2, 2024  End of Document
