   Only Khan sees the Brexit pitfalls; southlondonopinion South London Press May 17, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 MSI Media Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 16 Length: 362 words Body   The London Mayoral elections are done and dusted. Sadiq Khan won a third term with an increased majority, and he should be congratulated, as there was an extremely unpleasant aspect to some of the other parties' campaigning. To date, Mayor Khan is the only leading figure in either of the two mainstream parties who acknowledges the damage leaving the EU has done to this country. Monika Linton, owner of Spanish food company and London tapas restaurant chain Brindisa, was recently interviewed on Radio 4 about the effect of Brexit on her company. When asked if she had seen any Brexit benefits, she stated clearly that she had seen none. The latest polling confirms this - 56 per cent think Brexit was wrong, to 33 per cent who still think it was right - a 36 per cent slide in voter share in eight pointlessly hard years. Londoners did not vote for Brexit - eight years ago they gave the EU a positive thumbs up and voted to remain in the EU by a large majority. There is not a credible financial or economic institution that does not highlight the damage to the UK from Brexit. The facts are that Brexit has cost the country over £100 billion in GDP every year - £40 billion of tax revenues. We are becoming poorer as a country and our capital city is losing out on visitors and skilled workers. Whether we are buying flowers or food, the extra tariffs imposed by leaving the EU affect us all. The variety of food products available is shrinking, as companies in the EU choose to stay within their huge single market of 27 countries to buy and sell goods tariff free. The new, higher salary thresholds for overseas workers means that Italian restaurants in the capital cannot afford staff from Italy. The new biosecurity regulations that were brought in on April 30 are the latest example of Brexit shambles. Defra has to date been unable to explain how biosecurity and public health controls will be 'maintained' as they have claimed, by moving physical controls away from the border at Dover. So hats off to Sadiq Khan for acknowledging there is a very large elephant in London's room - and its name is Brexit. Barbara Callender, chairwoman, European Movement in Wandsworth & Merton Load-Date: May 17, 2024  End of Document
