   Open up a world of opportunity as Brexit enters its next phase; Physical checks at the border and increased bureaucracy with Britain won't leave Irish companies all at sea, writes Sandra O'Connell The Sunday Times (London) May 5, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS AND MONEY;BUSINESS; Pg. 8 Length: 1064 words Byline: Sandra O'Connell Body   n Tuesday last week, after much delay and five deferrals, the UK finally introduced physical checks on products such as meat, fish and plants entering from the European Union. O Although they won't apply to Irish imports until November at the earliest, at this stage of the Brexit saga, Niall McAllister of Quickcrop in Sligo is sanguine. He co-founded the online retailer of bulbs, plants and seeds with Andrew Davidson in 2008. By the Brexit referendum in 2016, 60 per cent of its revenues came from UK customers. Today just 20 per cent does. "But our overall business has grown," McAllister says. "It has been a tough old road to get here but we managed to grow at home and in the EU instead." The toughest part was having to change all his British suppliers to EU ones, a job that was only recently fully completed. "A number of our UK suppliers simply told us they weren't exporting any more, and just washed their hands of it. "Maybe they felt the UK is big enough that they could do without the hassle of exporting, but it wouldn't be the Irish way. We'd be out there scrapping for the business," he says. In some cases he bypassed British distributors and went directly to EU-based manufacturers instead. The company's EU customer base is growing. "Ironically, many are British people living in the EU who can't source the products they want from the UK, so they are coming to us," McAllister says. "We're also getting UK companies asking us if we will sell their products in the EU, because they don't know how to do it, so other opportunities have opened up too." In all, the company has grown its revenues by 60 per cent in five years. Marie-Aude Danguy founded Triskell Seafood in Sligo in 1999. For her the biggest challenge brought by Brexit was increased bureaucracy. "We have continued to work with all our British customers but the administrative side has been challenging at times. It's the little details; every week it seemed there was something new and no one was too sure what it all meant when you talked to the authorities, so that was a bit bamboozling," she says. Danguy specialises in live oysters, a highly perishable product, so the risk of delays at border control posts are a concern. But on the other hand, there have been upsides. "We've benefited from the fact that some of our competitors have simply given up on the UK market because they couldn't deal with the paperwork," Danguy says. While it is "not rocket science", it is a resource soak, taking half a day a week to complete. "But our UK customers have been excellent to us about it and we have been able to pass the additional cost on," she says. In 2015 Enterprise Ireland client companies sold (EURO)7.5 billion worth of goods and services into the UK. In 2022 that figure was (EURO)9.2 billion, up 22 per cent in seven years. "Brexit was never an event, it was a series of events. It was only ever one of a series of evolutions for markets," Deirdre McPartlin, Enterprise Ireland's regional director for the UK, Nordics and Ireland, says. The key to success was to just get on with it. "I was only talking to a food business about this yesterday. They said, 'We just find out what the rules are and comply with them'," she adds. For those selling into sectors in which the UK is a world leader, such as financial services or aerospace, the UK was simply too important not to trade with, McPartlin says. Whatever changes have been wrought by Brexit, the UK was always going to remain the most accessible market available to Irish businesses, whether starting or scaling. "From a language, proximity and familiarity perspective, it's still an enormously attractive, wealthy market, which is why overall Irish companies have stayed, remained loyal to their UK customer base and are ambitious for it," she says. Michael Murphy of Rivval, a supplier of goods and services to the railway sector, is happy that Brexit changes are reaching a conclusion. "Like every other business we have found it a stressful period, but long before it came into effect we'd been working with our local enterprise office to prepare for it, which proved very valuable," he says. Some of the potential opportunities Murphy identified during that period are now coming to pass. For example, the increased documentation required for goods moving from Britain into Northern Ireland, to prove they won't leave the north, is onerous enough to encourage some UK manufacturers to sell into the region through his company instead. "But what has changed the most for us is our supplier base, which we've moved to the Continent, in many cases dealing with the parent company instead," Murphy says. That has helped him expand his product range which, in turn, supported growth. "We've been very lucky. We've seen year-on-year growth now for the past six years," he adds. "In those years we've seen Brexit, Covid, embargos, wars, inflation and rising business costs. What we'd really like now is a decade of stability." Galway-based Suraya Diaz has an online health store selling her own range of organic foods, cosmetics and wellness products. In 2020, 70 per cent of her sales were in the UK. Today that figure is 10 per cent but she too has managed to grow her business, mainly by concentrating on Spain and Germany. "The UK is time-consuming. The paperwork is a lot more complicated. There are a lot less couriers available because of Brexit and, because customs are involved, there are delays too. Sometimes it can take a week, sometimes two weeks, for an order to arrive with a UK customer - you just can't tell," she says. British customers have to pay customs charges, which doesn't help on the sales front, while some of her UK ingredients suppliers stopped trading with the EU altogether. She also had to overhaul her supply chain, an arduous task for specialist organic ingredients. Having to translate and relabel products in Spanish and German was a job of work too, as was getting up to speed with sales in different countries and cultures. On the upside, British competitors that previously exported to EU countries "pulled back, opening up opportunities for me", Diaz says. "My business has grown overall, including in ways I had never thought about. Brexit forced me to look elsewhere. It wasn't a walk in the park but I'm happy." We're getting UK companies asking us if we will sell their products in the EU, because they don't know how to do it Graphic    Suraya Diaz, who sells a range of organic food, cosmetics and wellness products online, says Brexit forced her to grow Load-Date: May 5, 2024  End of Document
