   Pact of silence in the United Kingdom not to mention Brexit in the election campaign CE Noticias Financieras English June 22, 2024 Saturday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 757 words Body   Boston (Massachusetts) lit the fuse of the American Revolution with the tea party episode in the harbor, and Boston (Lincolnshire) gave Brexit a run for its money, being the British locality that by the largest margin (75% to 25%, compared to the national average of 52% to 48%) voted in favor of leaving the European Union in 2016. One of the greatest disasters, along with the Suez debacle and the loss of the U.S. colonies, in all of national history. But in this sad, depressed, long-faced Boston, from which many of the Eastern European workers (Lithuanians, Poles, Romanians, Bulgarians, Estonians...) who took advantage of the freedom of movement to do seasonal work in agriculture, care for the elderly or make a living in construction, have disappeared, no one mentions the word Brexit in the campaign for the July 4 election. Nor when analyzing the cause of the economic crisis and the cost of living. As if it didn't happen. It is like in families where a traumatic event (a suicide, a rape, ruin in gambling, political disgrace, jail, a fight between siblings...) hovers like a ghost that is always present but cannot be invoked. With the Brexit it is more or less the same, no one has yet the moral to take stock and rethink it. Some, those who are going to lose, are ashamed and better not to remove the garbage. Others, those who are going to win, why take the risk of hurting susceptibilities and losing votes they have in their pockets right now? The result is that the magic word, the one that has changed the course of the history of the United Kingdom, does not come out of the mouth of the Conservatives, whom it split in half and made all those who resisted a hard Brexit to be purged by Boris Johnson; nor from that of the ultra Nigel Farage (and he does not stop talking), even though he was his spiritual father, the man who cajoled Cameron to call the referendum and campaigned on a bus with an advertisement promising 400 million euros a week extra for public health. The "Tories" do not say the word so as not to remember the disaster, Farage for hard face and Labour for cowardice. Neither is the next Prime Minister, Keir Starmer, speaking about Brexit, lest someone remembers that he wanted to remain in Europe; and not even Ed Davey, the Liberal Democrat leader (the most pro-European party), who considers it a lost cause and does not perceive any desire to recreate the battle. So Brexit, for the purposes of the election campaign, does not exist and never did. The UK, it is not known why, has stopped growing between four and six points of GDP (at an estimated cost of 250 billion Euros), and has lost 50 billion Euros in tax receipts, and hardly exports anything other than financial services, in a trade with Europe that is subject to more obstacles with each passing day. The majority feeling in Boston, if the journalist puts his finger on it, is that the decision in itself to leave the EU and regain sovereignty to control immigration and enter into trade pacts with Asia and America was correct, but the (conservative) politicians have executed it badly and have turned it into an unmitigated disaster that at this point is very difficult to fix. "Democracy has been ignored outright. Many of the Europeans who left our kids unemployed and made housing more expensive have left, but they have been replaced by even more Africans, Chinese and Pakistanis, and that was not the idea. Free trade? The government has been unable to sign a single pact, what a bunch of useless people," says Eva Mason, manager of a flower export business. "Brussels is the equivalent of a military dictatorship that dictated how much we could fish in our own waters, and forced us to keep our doors open to immigrants. As an economic bloc it has obvious advantages, but politically it was a straitjacket that was too tight. Of course we need foreigners, but we have to be the ones to choose them, and in that sense we have gained something," says Peter Mellon, a restaurant owner. Many think that regaining sovereignty was a good idea, but politicians have not executed it well. And what do the quarter of voters who voted to stay in the EU think? They want to shout "I said so," but prefer to keep quiet so as not to anger their neighbors, and hope that Keir Starmer will gradually move closer to Europe, agree to a regulatory alignment on chemical and veterinary issues that will iron out the kinks in trade, give the go-ahead to the offer of freedom of movement for young people, and maybe later, in a second or third term, who knows? Load-Date: June 23, 2024  End of Document
