   Post-Brexit Britain is just as strong The Times (London) April 9, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 20 Length: 409 words Byline: François-Joseph Schichan Body   It is a common wisdom among most political commentators that Brexit has been a disaster for the UK's influence in the world. Latest to repeat this line was David Miliband in an opinion piece for The Observer. According to him, Britain has become a lower-status nation as a result of Brexit. But the facts contradict this simplistic vision. Since Brexit, there has been no sign that the UK has lost its influence in the world. If that was the case, why did the US and Australia join with Britain to sign the Aukus agreement in 2021, one of the most consequential partnerships for the Indo-Pacific region in recent times? How did Britain play such an important role in designing and implementing western sanctions against Russia? And why did this country manage to sign several free-trade agreements with major countries on terms that are as good as what the EU has managed to negotiate itself? While many British pundits might see the UK's influence as having been diminished by Brexit, other countries - friends and foes - clearly do not think the same way. Britain is not, for sure, the global superpower it once was. Just like France and other European countries, it has been a middle power for some time and will continue to be a middle power after Brexit. This does not mean that closer co-operation with the EU is not advisable - quite the contrary. There is space to intensify bilateral contacts with EU institutions and individual member states on security and foreign policy. The EU should welcome the Labour Party's proposal for a foreign policy and security pact, and work pragmatically with the UK on the challenges we face together. There are other issues that could have much more impact on Britain's place in the world than Brexit. The "special relationship" with the US, a mix of reality and fantasy, will continue to be tested regardless of the result of the US election. Either way, it will be America first. Russia and China will be other challenges. The EU is facing the same challenges and it is not yet proven that its approach - ever greater integration including on foreign policy and security - is necessarily the best one to defend and promote its interests. Just look at the EU's internal contradictions on Russia, Gaza and China. In this new fragmented and more uncertain world, post-Brexit Britain has all to play for. François-Joseph Schichan is a former French diplomat Why did the US and Australia join with UK on Aukus agreement? Load-Date: April 9, 2024  End of Document
