   Pro-European event criticises Brexit's impact Oxford Mail April 5, 2024 Friday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 413 words Byline: Jacob Manuschka Body   Oxford has hosted a pro-European event, with speakers arguing for a return to the European Union. The event at Wesley Memorial Church, which was hosted by Oxford for Europe, a pro-European campaign group, discussed their message that "Brexit is a failed project: a brighter future is possible". The event on March 20 featured pro-European speakers Danny Dorling, Liz Webster, and Willow Fisher. Oxford-born Professor Danny Dorling of St Peter's College presented new findings showing the negative impact of Brexit on public well-being. Professor Dorling recently authored a report titled "Brexit - a failed project in a failing state" in which he discusses circumstances such as increased hunger and widespread unhappiness in post-Brexit Britain. Liz Webster, a farmer and founder and co-leader of Save British Farming and Save British Food also spoke at the event. Ms Webster has been campaigning against the damaging effects of Brexit on the farming community and has become known for her tractor protests. Her concerns extend to the nation's food standards, food security, and food safety, which she feels have been endangered by new trade deals negotiated by the Brexit government. Willow Fisher, the head of campaigns for the Young European Movement UK, discussed the implications of Brexit for the younger generation. Mr Fisher focuses on issues such as the loss of the Erasmus+ scheme and the reduction in opportunities for young people to travel and work abroad. He spoke about the Embrace Erasmus campaign, which advocates for the UK-s return to the Erasmus+ programme. The campaign is supported by the British Youth Council and by mayor of London Sadiq Khan and Sir Vince Cable, among others. The event also included a public display of the Star of European Unity, a touring artwork created by Jacques Tilly, a German sculptor and renowned carnival float designer. This artwork symbolises the UK's past and potential future place in the European Union. John Tanner, the former Lord Mayor and honorary secretary of Oxford for Europe, expressed his pride in Oxford's connections with Europe. He said: "Our city is proud of its European links and the many EU citizens who live here among us. "There is now an ever stronger public will to reverse the harms of Brexit and get our country back where it belongs, at the heart of Europe." The event was held at the Wesley Memorial Church on New Inn Hall Street, Oxford. It was free for students and young people and was chaired by Geraldine Coggins. Load-Date: April 10, 2024  End of Document
