   Rachel Reeves will seek 'improved' trade terms between the UK and the EU if Labour wins the election. CE Latin America Migration English June 17, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 ContentEngineLLC All Rights Reserved Length: 828 words Byline: Javier Morales Body    Rachel Reeves, the chancellor's shadow, would seek to tear down EU trade barriers and secure billions of pounds through an early international investment summit if Labour wins the general election. In an interview with the Financial Times, Reeves signaled an ambitious push to overhaul parts of Boris Johnson's Brexit deal, including seeking greater alignment with EU rules in areas such as the chemicals sector and a better deal for workers in the City of London. "We are looking to improve our trading relationship with Europe and do trade deals around the world," he said, promising that a future Labour government would "reboot" Britain's global image. His comments indicate that Labour wants to go further than previously thought in seeking better trade terms between the UK and the EU, tackling the Conservatives' "adversarial" post-Brexit relationship with Brussels head-on and abandoning the Conservative obsession with regulatory divergence. "I don't think anyone voted to leave the EU because they were unhappy that chemical regulations were the same across Europe," Reeves said. "When my constituency voted to leave, it was purely because of immigration." The Labour Party has been reluctant to talk about Brexit on the campaign trail, but as election day approaches, and with the party 20 points ahead of the Conservatives, Reeves and Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer have given more glimpses of what they hope to achieve. He also said Labour would take risks and was willing to "upset some people" to unlock the potential of the British economy, adding that it would use its political capital by boosting growth rather than "fighting over different taxes." Ahead of the July 4 election, the Conservatives have warned of a Labour "tax trap." But Reeves insisted the party could fund its priorities without resorting to tax increases on the wealthy, adding, "We're not looking for a mandate to raise taxes on individuals. We're looking for a mandate to grow the economy." As for Brexit, any attempt to reopen what Starmer has called Johnson's "disastrous" 2020 trade deal with the EU would be highly complicated; there is little interest in Brussels in a renegotiation and longstanding opposition to the idea of Britain "cherry-picking" parts of the EU single market. Reeves spoke about a "bespoke" deal for the chemical industry, which is in talks with the government on a new regulatory system aimed at avoiding £2 billion of additional costs associated with having to register products with a new UK regime. He reiterated Labor's existing red lines in the area, saying there would be no re-entry into the single market or customs union, and that freedom of movement and a youth mobility deal were ruled out. These will limit the scope of any future agreement with the EU. Reeves stressed the importance of seeking greater mutual recognition of professional qualifications with the EU, noting the benefits this would bring for the services sector, including financial services. "Most people in the City have not seen Brexit as a great opportunity for their businesses," he said, arguing that services and financial services were "virtually excluded" from Johnson's Brexit deal. But he said the Labour manifesto pledge to seek a mutual recognition agreement for professional qualifications with the EU, along with a veterinary deal and better touring rights for UK artists, were "examples" of what he wanted to achieve. "That's not exclusive," he said. Reeves said he accepted the Office for Budget Responsibility's assessment that Brexit would reduce Britain's productivity potential by 4%. The shadow chancellor, who on Monday will bring together senior business leaders at a meeting of her new "shadow" British Infrastructure Council, said she wanted a Labour government to hit the ground running and take advantage of the fact that the world would be looking at the UK again after polling day. Among the additional steps in the first 100 days of a Labour government would be an investment summit that would seek to attract foreign investors who had been deterred by political instability in the U.K., he said. Reeves said that earlier that morning he had spoken to a City business leader who had said his global CEO had been reluctant to attend a recent investment summit in the UK organized by Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's government. "They said 'What's the point, we're a bit tired of what's going on in the U.K. Do I have to come to this?" said Reeves. "This is a real reset moment toward a different way of doing government." He added: "It's not just about inviting business to a summit, it's about really bringing them to the center of government. I want the Treasury to be not just a tax and spend department, but a department for growth." Reeves said there was "a role for investment" from countries such as China and Saudi Arabia, but added that it was right that the Sunak government had excluded Chinese investment from broadband deployment and future nuclear projects. Load-Date: June 18, 2024  End of Document
