   Reeves pledges to tear down EU trade barriers in reset for relations; ? Parts of Brexit deal to be revisited ? More alignment with Brussels rules ? Early investment summit Financial Times (London, England) June 17, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1 Length: 610 words Byline: SAM FLEMING ; GEORGE PARKER Body   Shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves will seek to break down EU trade barriers and secure billions of pounds through an early international investment summit if a Labour government is elected. Speaking in an interview with the Financial Times, Reeves signalled an ambitious push to revisit parts of Boris Johnson's Brexit deal, including seeking closer alignment with EU rules in areas such as the chemicals sector and a better deal for workers in the City of London. "We would look to improve our trading relationship with Europe, and do trade deals around the world," she said, as she pledged to "reset" Britain's global image. Her comments signal that Labour wants to go further than previously thought in seeking better trade terms with the EU, tackling head-on the "adversarial" Conservative post-Brexit relationship with Brussels and ditching a fixation on regulatory divergence. "I don't think anyone voted Leave because they were not happy that chemicals regulations were the same across Europe," Reeves said. "When my constituency voted leave it was purely because of immigration." Reeves will today host senior business leaders at a meeting of her new "shadow" British Infrastructure Council. Labour has been reluctant to talk about Brexit in the election campaign, but as the vote approaches - and with the party 20 points ahead of the Conservatives in the polls - Reeves and Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer have begun to give more glimpses of what they hope to achieve. Labour is willing to "upset some people" to unlock the potential of the British economy, Reeves said, adding that she would use her political capital by pushing for growth rather than "having a fight about different taxes". Ahead of the July 4 election, the Conservatives have warned of a Labour "tax trap". But Reeves insisted the party could fund its priorities without resorting to tax rises for the wealthy. On Brexit, any attempt to reopen what Starmer has called Johnson's "botched" 2020 trade deal with the EU would be complicated. There is little appetite in Brussels for a renegotiation and long-standing opposition to the idea of Britain "cherry-picking" parts of the single market. Reeves spoke of a "bespoke" arrangement for the chemicals industry and stressed the importance of seeking greater mutual recognition of professional qualifications. This would benefit the services sector, including financial services, she said. "The majority of people in the City have not regarded Brexit as being a great opportunity for their businesses," she said, arguing that services and financial services were "pretty much excluded" from Johnson's Brexit deal. Labour's manifesto promise to seek a mutual recognition deal for professional qualifications with the EU, along with a veterinary deal and improved touring rights for UK artists, were "examples" of what she wanted to achieve, but "that's not exclusive", she said. She reiterated Labour's existing red lines, saying there would be no rejoining the single market or customs union, and that freedom of movement and a deal on youth mobility were off the cards. These will limit the scope of any future EU deal. The shadow chancellor said she wanted a Labour government to exploit the fact that the world would be looking afresh at the UK after election day: "This is a real reset moment." Among the other steps in the first 100 days of a Labour government would be an investment summit aiming to lure in foreign investors who have been deterred by the UK's political instability, she said. News & analysis page 2 Ruchir Sharma & George Bridges page 23 'The majority in the City have not regarded Brexit as a great opportunity for their businesses' Graphic    Rachel Reeves made it clear there would be no rejoining the single market or the customs union - Charlie Bibby/FT Load-Date: June 16, 2024  End of Document
