   Reversing Brexit: How a Labour government could bring the UK back in line with the EU; Analysis Red lines will come under pressure and Brussels will argue it has right to dictate the terms of any new deal The Daily Telegraph (London) June 19, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 782 words Byline: James Crisp Body   BACK in 2019, Sir Keir Starmer and other Labour heavyweights including David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary in line to oversee the next generation of Brexit talks, called for a second referendum on the UK's EU membership. Had they been successful, they would have urged Labour to back Remain. But the EU's hard-nosed negotiators won't be prepared to cut Sir Keir any slack just because they are dealing with Labour and not the Tories. The European Commission has its own interests, its own red lines and its own goals and will demand London aligns with EU rules as the price for the agreement. It will seek to limit divergence from EU rules because the UK is a large and close market to it - and is now an economic competitor. It will insist that Labour cannot "cherry-pick" the benefits of EU membership without the obligations and will argue the bloc's bigger size and huge market gives it the right to dictate the terms of a new Brexit deal. Any Labour ask will also be met with demands from Brussels for access to British fishing waters and a freedom of movement light deal. Labour has ruled out a return to the single market and customs union, and a youth mobility deal. However, as in any negotiation, those red lines will come under pressure. Migrant returns deal An EU-wide migrant returns deal would allow Sir Keir to send Channel migrants back to France - which has not been possible since Brexit. The replacement of the Dublin Regulation, which means a migrant can be sent back to the first safe country they land in, would be a major coup for Sir Keir. However, there is little appetite for such a deal in European capitals. Labour have signalled they would agree to take in genuine refugees from under-pressure EU countries like Italy, in return for being able to send back illegal small boat migrants. 'Improved' trade agreement Labour wants to improve the "botched" free trade deal made by Boris Johnson's government in 2020. The agreement is pencilled in for review in 2026 but the EU said the deal could be tweaked but not rewritten. However, 2026 is also when EU access to British fishing waters is set to be renegotiated. Brussels is likely to ask for a quid pro quo guaranteeing it continues or improves quotas, in return for any trade concessions. Sir Keir will hope to remove some of those trade barriers, but Brussels will demand the sacrifice of some post- Brexit independence in return. Animals, plants and chemicals Labour's desire to strike an agreement on animal and plant health rules is a good example of that sacrifice. The UK and EU are now two separate regulatory jurisdictions, which means increased border checks to ensure goods crossing meet the standards of the importing country. Sir Keir wants an agreement to reduce EU checks on UK plants, live animals and food entering the EU and Northern Ireland, which continues to follow hundreds of single market rules. Brussels will demand the UK align with EU rules. Labour insists the UK will not be a rule-taker but the EU rejected previous British calls for a deal based on mutual recognition, where both jurisdictions agree that the other reaches the same standard through different rules. Foreign policy and security Both Labour and the EU want to formalise foreign policy and security cooperation, which has been run on an ad hoc basis since Brexit. Both sides see the value in codifying cooperation on issues such as sanctions after the war in Ukraine - it is in Western interests to present a united front to Putin. But an earlier offer from Brussels was rejected by the Tories because it was based on binding rules - seen as too similar to EU structures.Net zero deal The UK left the EU's Emissions Trading Scheme, the world's largest carbon market, and set up its own version. The markets are an important part of the push for Net Zero in both jurisdictions and Labour is now reportedly considering how to realign the British market with the EU's. The reason is because the EU is working on a carbon tariff wall. This will subject imports of goods from places with less tough environmental rules. Alignment will mean British goods could escape the EU green tariff. Touring artists, financial services and freedom of movement lite Before Brexit, British artists could benefit from EU freedom of movement rules to tour Europe. Labour said it hopes to change that. Recognition of qualifications for city workers is likely to bring a demand for assurances that UK financial recognition will not diverge from EU rules. Asking for a laxer regime for touring artists will be met with demands for youth mobility, which Labour has ruled out. But it could mean a return to the Erasmus student exchange, which the UK left at Brexit. Load-Date: June 19, 2024  End of Document
