   RISHI: STARMER WILL UNPICK BREXIT AND REJOIN EU BY BACK DOOR; EXCLUSIVE RISHI'S WARNING ON EIGHTH ANNIVERSARY OF LEAVE VOTE Pictures: EDWARD MASSEY / CCHQ The Express June 24, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,4,5 Length: 843 words Byline: Sam Lister Body   LABOUR wants to "unpick" Brexit and drag Britain back into the EU, the PM warned. On the eighth anniversary of the historic vote to leave, Rishi TURN TO PAGE 4 FROM PAGE ONE Sunak warned a big Labour majority would allow Sir Keir Starmer to "fulfil his ambitions" to be part of the bloc again. Economists yesterday urged the Labour leader to rejoin the single market and customs union if he wins power next week. The Prime Minister said that those calls give his opponent - who led the charge to reverse the Leave vote with a second referendum - the cover he needs to betray Brexit. Mr Sunak said that he "proudly" voted for Brexit. He told the Daily Express: "Starmer didn't just oppose Brexit. "He voted to block it 48 times in Parliament and energetically campaigned for a second referendum with free movement of people. "Unsurprisingly, we now know Starmer's team think his plans for growth are doomed unless he takes Britain back into the EU's single market and customs union. It can only mean one thing: if he gets the keys to No 10, Starmer will stick Britain into reverse gear. "Starmer now has the perfect excuse to rejoin the EU by the back door. All he needs is unchecked power in No 10 and he will have the opportunity and the means to fulfil his ambitions." Sir Keir and Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves have faced claims they have not shown how they will deliver their manifesto pledge of securing the highest sustained economic growth of any G7 country. Dimitri Zenghelis, an economist at the London School of Economics, said that extra trade barriers with the EU had stifled investment. He told a newspaper that rejoining the single market and customs union was the only way the UK could " shift the dial in a meaningful way". Prof Stephen Millard, of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, said the "closer we are able to get to where we were [as full members of the EU] then the higher growth we will get out of it". Brink The claims were disputed by other academics who warned universities have become politicised. Michel Barnier, ex-Brexit negotiator for the EU, fears that France is on the brink of following Britain out of the bloc as its government is failing to listen to public anger about migration, security, authority of the state and how the poorest parts of the country are treated. He said: "That was the case in the UK, and I think it could be the same in France." Bob Seely, the Conservative candidate for Isle of Wight West, said: "Labour are going to undo the progress we have made. "We can't let them go back to square one - and a vote for Reform is a vote to let in Labour for a generation.We still have work to do on migration, but there are many bonuses linked to Brexit. "These include: avoiding the EU migration pact, no longer paying EU budget contributions, being able to turn away criminals from EU countries which we could not do before, higher animal welfare standards, quicker action on Ukraine, better wages for the lowest paid, more corporate transpar- ency and avoiding a share in £750billion worth of EU debt. "On pensions, in the EU, on inflation a vote for Labour is a vote to go backwards, not forwards. We need to stick with Rishi." Gwythian Prins, LSE research professor and ex-Nato adviser, said it was "not true" the economy had performed badly since Brexit and it was "simply wrong" that extra barriers had cut trade and stifled investment. He added: "There is an argument that says on the one hand that our gross domestic product has fallen or will not rise, but this is a prediction. The actual performance since we left the European Union has been that our economy has performed healthily. Evidence "We have not been paying money into the EU, something like £11billion-12billion, and in terms of foreign direct investment this country has the best record in the free world after the US." Prof Prins said his view was in a minority across universities because academia "unfortunately has now become very politically skewed". He added: "I don't think it is a political issue. "I think it is just an issue of evidence. This is to do with economic evidence." Shadow Foreign Secretary David Lammy and London Mayor Sadiq Khan are also lobbying for a free movement deal for young people. Labour is fielding a number of candidates who are committed to pushing for Britain to fully rejoin. Sir Keir has said he will not rejoin the EU or its single market and customs union. But he wants a different trade relationship and "much more collaboration" on research and development, in education, security and other areas. The EU is unlikely to agree to any new agreements without extracting favourable terms for the bloc in return. Ms Reeves said she wanted to seek closer alignment with EU rules in the chemicals and veterinary sectors, better touring rights for UK artists and greater mutual recognition of qualifications for financial services workers - but it is not an "exclusive" list. The Labour manifesto states: "There will be no return to the single market, the customs union or freedom of movement." OPINION: PAGE 12 Graphic    Anti-Brexit rally...Sir Keir, in 2019Home...Rishi Sunak at food festival and junior parkrun in Northallerton, where he is standing againPictures: EDWARD MASSEY / CCHQ Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
