   Scottish pro-EU group to host mass 'busk against Brexit' event The National (Scotland) March 25, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 602 words Byline: Laura Pollock Body   A SCOTTISH pro-EU campaign group are to launch its latest campaign to highlight issues experienced by musicians since Brexit. The European Movement in Scotland (EMiS) has announced plans to launch "Face the Music" - a campaign calling for the UK Government to "face the music and find a solution" to issues facing musicians on tour in Europe after Brexit. To launch the campaign, EMiS are set to host a mass "busk against Brexit" in Edinburgh on the Royal Mile on April 16 and is inviting musicians from all backgrounds to join them as they take to the streets to make some noise. READ MORE: Europe Day: Experts to debate Scotland's European future SNP MSP Michelle Thomson will also host a round table at the Scottish Parliament on April 16 to explore the issues with music industry professionals and to discuss solutions. Thomson said: "In many of the meetings of the Cross-Party Group on Music in the Scottish Parliament, of which I am Convenor, there have been discussions regarding the impact of Brexit-. "Artists have faced a huge increase in costs to tour: both those coming to the UK and our artists wishing to tour abroad. There has also been an increase in the amount of paperwork required for performing overseas, with lengthy delays and restrictions. "This has also affected many grassroots music venues with many small venues closing their doors for good. This in turn limits the places where bands can perform." Thomson (above) added: -The world-renowned music sector in Scotland is suffering heavily from the effects of a Brexit the people of Scotland simply did not vote for-. The launch comes after professor Jonathan Freeman-Attwood, the principal of the Royal Academy of Music, said the proportion of European students at the London academy had fallen by half since 2016 and warned that Brexit has -stopped the flow of talent coming in- last month. The principal said Brexit had brought no benefits and instead may cause -terminal damage- to the UK-s music industry -The whole idea of boundaries and not being able to travel and not being able to collaborate with people from different countries is totally alien to the concept of being a professional musician.- Asked if there were benefits to Brexit, he said: -The benefits. There are no benefits. There is nothing there. There are no winners.- A petition launched by the UK organisation already has a petition on its website which has gained more than 24,000 signatures. READ MORE: What's happening in the race to shape the future of the European Union The petition states: "Music is a central part of our cultural identity; it champions diversity and supports our local communities. We must act now and demand that our politicians act." Several leading musicians have already spoken out publicly about the challenges that they have faced including Scottish band Biffy Clyro, singer KT Tunstall, and violinist Nicola Bendetti. EMiS campaign coordinator David McDonald said: "The campaign will amplify the voices of the people who work in the music industry by sharing their experiences and concerns. Demonstrating how Brexit is holding back the next generation of artists and music professionals." McDonald also reached out for musicians to join the event. He said: "We want anyone who can play a note or hold a tune to join us in Edinburgh on April 16 to help launch Face the Music. Through the universal language of music, we can raise awareness and demonstrate our solidarity with Scotland's music industry who enrich our cultural landscape and play a vital role in fostering connections across Europe." To join the Busk against Brexit simply register here. Load-Date: March 25, 2024  End of Document
