   Senior Tory 'tied up in knots' over Brexit claims during BBC interview The National (Scotland) June 24, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 503 words Byline: Adam Robertson Body   THE UK-s Northern Ireland Secretary was left -tied up in knots- during his morning media round following claims he made about Brexit. Chris Heaton-Harris, who is not seeking re-election on July 4, was interviewed on BBC Radio 4-s Today programme by Mishal Husain. The pair started to discuss Brexit with the host asking the senior Tory if Brexit -is working perfectly- for the UK. Listen to Mishal Husain tie Chris Heaton-Harris up in knots over changing his mind.  MH: Do you think brexit is working perfectly?  CHH: "I think brexit is working well for our country.."#r4today pic.twitter.com/nLn59Q9d8s - Haggis_UK (@Haggis_UK) June 24, 2024 He replied: -I think Brexit is working well for our country,- although conceded that -everything can work better- when pushed on his point. Husain then asked if the fact Heaton-Harris believed it could be improved showed there was scope to secure new deals with the EU in line with the view of many exporters. -I think when we went through the Windsor Framework which I helped to negotiate with the Prime Minister, we started to work out with the European Union better ways of doing business,- he said. READ MORE: John Swinney: Scotland-s voice -doesn-t matter to Westminster- He continued to say that it was a -process- and not a -straightforward yes/no thing-. Husain then added: -I think that-s probably exactly what the Labour Party would say that there-s an ongoing process of thinking about ways that our relationship with the EU could be streamlined.- The Northern Ireland Secretary then claimed that Keir Starmer would want to see -free movement-, which the Labour leader has previously said he would not back. Heaton-Harris then said that former French politician Michel Barnier recently called on Labour to back free movement and added: -Oh, does that mean Keir Starmer-s changed his mind again?- Husain then asked Heaton-Harris if he had ever changed his mind about anything and why it was okay for him to do so but not the Labour leader. -Because it-s a fundamental point of principle where Keir Starmer needs to be believed whether he would go for free movement and he will,- he replied. He was also pressed on the cancellation of the northern legs of the high-speed rail project HS2, which Heaton-Harris defended as he said money was prioritised elsewhere. He continued: -I might humbly suggest that in future interviews when you-re asking me this question and I-ve changed my mind and I-m being criticised for changing my mind because of circumstances I-ll remind you that politicians are therefore allowed to.- READ MORE: Douglas Ross: Reform could help SNP take seats from Scottish Tories A number of people on social media criticised Heaton-Harris with News Agents presenter Jon Sopel saying: -I do understand better why we don-t hear much from Chris Heaton-Harris on the morning media round-- Another described it as -absolutely brutal- while another user said he had been left -tied up in knots-. A fourth Twitter/X user meanwhile said it was -incoherent nonsense- from Heaton-Harris. Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
