   SNP launch Highland manifesto with pledge to undo damage done by Brexit The National (Scotland) June 24, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 531 words Byline: Alasdair Ferguson Body   THE SNP have launched their Highland manifesto highlighting the damage caused by Brexit as the party promises to stand up for rural communities. The SNP have put the difficulties faced by rural communities caused by Brexit as their top priority in their Highland manifesto, as well as focus on addressing the housing and energy crises. Westminster cuts to public services, soaring energy bills and food prices, the loss of freedom of movement, Erasmus, and EU funding were also emphasised in the 28-page document. Both Labour and the Tories have ruled out rejoining the EU as the Institute for Fiscal Studies backed the SNP-s calculation that Brexit has resulted in a loss of 30 billion of revenues to the public purse. READ MORE: Everything you need to know about what's in the SNP manifesto The manifesto also calls for a reduction in VAT for the tourism and hospitality sectors, while scrapping VAT to rejuvenate town centres from Thurso to Dingwall and Fort William. It also outlines plans to establish the Scottish Rural Community Immigration Pilot scheme to help attract and replace the migrants needed in local remote communities for work in their specific industries. Ahead of the launch Deputy First Minister, Kate Forbes (below), warned of the -acute damage done to Scotland-s Highlands by a Westminster-imposed Brexit-. (Image: Gordon Terris) She added the SNP are the only party who are standing up for Highland communities. Forbes said: -Today-s manifesto launch demonstrates the SNP-s commitment to Highland communities at this election. -The devastating truth for too many in the Highlands is that their needs, priorities and views have been ignored by a Westminster establishment that isn-t working for Scotland, and who's only offer is more of the same with broken, Brexit Britain. -Taking the last 14 years alone, the Highlands have endured brutal spending cuts, devastating Brexit impacts and a cost of living crisis, all of which have hit Highland households and businesses particularly hard. -That-s why the SNP is calling for the reversal of these cuts, rejoining the EU and proper support for households and businesses through a Highland energy rebate and targeted VAT cuts. -Instead, both the Labour Party and the Tories are stubbornly backing Brexit, 18 billion pounds of cuts to our public services and damaging policies that are hostile to immigration while leaving the door open to NHS privatisation.- The manifesto also looks to secure more funding for important infrastructures in the Highlands, while aiming to improve sustainability in key industries like agriculture and fishing. Meanwhile the SNP plan to invest more in schools and hospitals, and replace the lost EU road funding as they aim to work with the Highland Council to support their ambitious 2bn local infrastructure plan. READ MORE: SNP manifesto is 'what many wanted Labour to deliver' - NHS doctor There are also calls for more support for community renewable projects to foster a sense of ownership and participation while supporting a circular economy. They also hope to scrap standing charges on energy bills and introduce a Highland Energy Rebate to offset the high energy costs faced by rural communities. Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
