   Starmer's plan for a softer Brexit 'too ambitious' i-news June 3, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: SPORT; Pg. 10 Length: 942 words Byline: Arj Singh; Hugo Gye Body   Labour's plan for a softer Brexit may be "too ambitious" and would mean signing up to Brussels' rules, senior EU officials have warned. Insiders have said Sir Keir Starmer's expectations of a closer economic relationship with the European Union without any further legal ties were "too high". The majority of Labour supporters back rejoining the EU, according to BMG Research polling for i. Sir Keir meanwhile wants the fastest sustained growth in the G7 - seen by many as unlikely without easing trade with Brussels. With 63 per cent of those planning to vote Labour in favour of rejoining the EU, according to the polling, Sir Keir (inset) is likely to come under heavy pressure, if he wins power, to strengthen the UK's relationship with Brussels. Labour has set out its red lines on the matter: no rejoining the EU, no single market and no customs union. The party says it wants to boost the economy by easing trade, using a veterinary agreement that will mean fewer checks on animal and plant products, including food, crossing from the EU to UK and vice versa. However, senior EU officials have warned that this would mean signing up to Brussels' rules and the European Court of Justice (ECJ), which may put Labour's red lines under pressure. Senior Labour figures have also suggested to i that the policy may go further than a veterinary agreement, by building on some of the easing of trade in the Windsor Framework to "de-dramatise" customs checks. But two senior EU officials told i that just a veterinary agreement would involve ECJ oversight and "dynamic alignment" with Brussels laws, which would mean the UK implementing regulations over which it had no control. One official involved in the Brexit negotiations said: "You would have to have dynamic alignment and the court of justice, not because we love the court, but you have to enforce the rules". This official also rejected suggestions that trade concessions made under the Windsor Framework can be transplanted to the whole of the UK, arguing that "concessions and exceptions" on EU rules were made for Northern Ireland because of its history and political instability. "There's a pipe bomb found there every day," the source said. "It can't work for the whole UK." But a European Commission source said Labour might be guilty of over-ambition about what was possible, saying: "They may be raising expectations too high." Under a veterinary agreement involving ECJ oversight, the UK could be hit with sanctions by the EU - such as trade tariffs - if there was a dispute over the terms of the deal being breached and European judges ruled in Brussels' favour. Labour maintains that ECJ oversight is already the status quo in many post-Brexit arrangements around the Windsor Framework, law enforcement, judicial co-operation, data exchanges and the Horizon research programme. EU insiders have been taken aback by the party's hostility to Brussels' April offer to the UK of a new youth mobility deal after the Tories took the UK out of the Erasmus student exchange programme. One said that they were "impressed" with Sir Keir's discipline on Brexit, adding: "I couldn't play such a long game with [Jeremy] Corbyn and now Brexit." Despite Labour's rejection, a future government led by Sir Keir would be likely to come under pressure internally to take up the EU's offer on youth mobility. One frontbencher said rejoining would be an "obvious" move, while a Shadow Cabinet minister described it as a "good scheme". At least two other Shadow Cabinet figures support the idea, sources say. Labour's official position is that it has "no plans" to rejoin the scheme and has not had any discussions about doing so, potentially fearing claims that it would be opening the door to more EU immigration while paying Brussels for membership of Erasmus. But Shadow Cabinet support for the move illustrates the pressure Sir Keir may face on softening Brexit. A senior Labour activist said Erasmus "looks far too much like freedom of movement" for the party to express support for it now, but added: "I'd be very surprised if they didn't rejoin Erasmus, but they'll never say as much ahead of a general election." A Labour spokesman said: "We have always been clear that we would seek to negotiate a veterinary agreement with the EU, to help tackle the increased costs and bureaucracy created by the Conservatives' botched Brexit deal. "The final nature of any agreement would of course be subject to negotiations." Labour 'likely to sign up to European court' Anand Menon, director of the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank, says Labour has "downplayed" the prospect of European Court of Justice membership so far. He said: "My sense is they will do it and they won't be too bothered - you'll have 200 Tory MPs complaining about sovereignty but they won't mind. "The key thing is whether any deal annoys people who matter - for the Tories that was the case if you moved closer to the EU. "Starmer's problem, if you have a rump Tory party in opposition a long time from an election, is not being fast enough [in getting closer to the EU]. "If we said we are going to be rule takers on financial services and for example the French passed egregious laws that would affect the City, you can see how that would be a problem. "But agricultural regulations are less likely to cause an issue." Professor Menon said that Erasmus membership may be difficult because the commission had called on the UK to charge European students the same fees as Britons, rather than higher charges levied on overseas students, and this may cause an issue for stretched university finances. "The Commission has made it harder to rejoin Erasmus," he added. Load-Date: June 3, 2024  End of Document
