   STARMER DID FIGHT CORBYN: TO STOP BREXIT Mail on Sunday (London) July 1, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 16 Length: 338 words Body   SIR Keir Starmer has never given an straight answer to the question 'Why did you say that Jeremy Corbyn would be "a great prime minister"?' He has also struggled to explain why he served in Corbyn's shadow cabinet, while the likes of Rachel Reeves and Yvette Cooper refused. But Starmer had another go last week, telling an interviewer that he was 'right to fight from within the shadow cabinet' and citing 'commitment to NATO' as an example. Actually, NATO membership was never an issue. But Brexit was. And on this matter, Starmer definitely fought Corbyn: the then Labour leader was adamantly against the idea of a second referendum. Starmer, however, knew that party members (unlike millions of Labour voters) were virulently anti-Brexit, and they wanted the country to vote again on the matter. So at the 2018 party conference in Liverpool, and without warning the leadership, Starmer called for a second referendum, adding: 'And nobody is ruling out Remain as an option.' The delighted members rose to cheer, but instantly the Conservatives put out on social media: 'Confirmed - Labour will not respect the result of the referendum'. Waving a copy of this in Sir Keir's face, according to Tom Baldwin's biography of Starmer, Corbyn's political secretary Amy Jackson shouted: 'Look at what you have just done!' Indeed. I wrote in the days before Labour's defeat in the 2019 election: 'Look no further for the reason the Conservatives seem poised to win a tranche of seats in the Midlands and the North, some of which have not failed to back Labour in living memory. These are all constituencies which came out heavily for Brexit.' Even after that, Starmer, running for the Labour leadership, asked if 'free movement' of migration with the EU should remain post-Brexit, replied: 'Of course, bring [it] back.' Now, though, he has focused his campaign on winning back the pro-Brexit voters he disdained, with every single poster mixing the Labour Party's Red with a Union Jack. How fortunate for Sir Keir that so many have short memories. Load-Date: July 1, 2024  End of Document
