   Starmer will reverse Brexit, says Badenoch; Minister urges Tory voters to stick with the party despite a 'frustrating' past few years The Daily Telegraph (London) June 22, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE, TEASERS; Pg. 1 Length: 595 words Byline: Daniel Martin Body   LABOUR will reverse Brexit if it wins the general election, Kemi Badenoch warns today. In an interview with The Telegraph, the Business Secretary says Brexit is a "10 to 20-year project" and that any benefits will disappear if Sir Keir Starmer becomes prime minister. She also understands why some on the Right are "frustrated" with the Conservatives but has urged them not to defect to Reform UK, saying it would be a wasted vote. Instead, she tells them to "look at the bad things we have stopped that will come in under Labour". Reports emerged yesterday that Labour had drawn up plans to raise capital gains tax and inheritance tax, bringing in £10billion a year. Tomorrow is the eighth anniversary of the referendum to leave the EU. Sir Keir has called for closer cooperation with Brussels on education, defence and security. He has also said he does not want to diverge from EU standards on workers' rights and food standards. Addressing Brexit, Mrs Badenoch says: "One of my biggest challenges is the criticism on the Right that we haven't done things that we actually have done… they are trying to tell people that it has not been a success. "This is a 10 or 20-year project. We've just started. It's like building a house and someone comes in and says oh, it's not done yet, he's failed. Or you're cooking something and, five minutes later, it's not cooked yet, it's not working, let's stop. "Making sure everyone is focused on getting those benefits is absolutely critical. I think that's one area where I've tried to do as much as possible, but we need more of that strategy. That's something that's going to disappear if Labour come in; they will take us backwards. They will take us back to square one. They're just going to copy the EU." The minister says that not only would Labour seek to unravel the Brexit vote, it would bring in a slew of disruptive regulations on business. She accuses Sir Keir of seeking to bring in equality laws that would require pay cuts for men to ensure firms close the gender pay gap. She is also "very worried" that Labour would scrap guidance telling teachers not to help children socially transition, which is when a pupil changes their preferred pronouns. Mrs Badenoch declined to answer questions about whether she could be a future Conservative leader. A poll for The Telegraph this week found she would be the only Tory "big beast" left with a seat after the election. Yesterday, a new poll showed Reform had more support than the Tories. The survey, by Whitestone Insight of 2,029 adults in Britain, put Reform on 20 per cent and the Tories on 19 per cent. Labour was on 39 per cent. Mrs Badenoch says: "It's very sad for me, seeing the Reform vote go up, but I understand where a lot of people who are looking that way are coming from... I hate the way people talk about Reform voters, I think it is very disrespectful. We should not talk about people who are on the centre-Right that way." She adds that a vote for Mr Farage's party is a wasted vote. "Remember that the Reform vote is not concentrated enough to get seats. [It] may get loads of votes, but they wouldn't get seats." Mrs Badenoch says that because the Conservative intake during Boris Johnson's 2019 success was so broad, some traditional voters believed the party was not doing enough on issues such as "free markets or defence". Despite this, she adds: "I don't think that we have lost touch with core values at all." Kemi Badenoch: Page 8 Editorial Comment: Page 21 'Brexit is a 10 or 20-year project. It's like building a house and someone says oh, it's not done yet' Load-Date: June 22, 2024  End of Document
