   Swinney hits out at rivals over Brexit Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 25, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 311 words Byline: KATRINE BUSSEY Body   THE Tories and Labour have "turned their back on Scotland's interest" by refusing to consider rejoining the EU, First Minister John Swinney claimed yesterday. The SNP leader highlighted the impact that the ending of the freedom of movement had had on businesses and the economy. Speaking at Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen, Swinney said: "As First Minister, I cannot sit back and accept the damage of Brexit that Labour will continue to impose. "That will hurt too many people, it will hurt public services and it will hurt businesses." Leaving the EU has cost Scotland £2.3billion in public revenue, Swinney said, arguing there was now at least £1.6billion less to spend on the NHS and other public services as a result, "the equivalent of more than one in six of our NHS staff ". Swinney said that given the damage that Brexit caused, it is "astonishing that none of the Westminster parties are interested in repairing that damage". He warned Scots that backing either Labour or the Conservatives next week would be "a vote for continued Brexit damage". Arguing that "the Westminster parties have turned their back on Scotland's interests", Swinney was clear that "Scotland's interests lie firmly in being part of the European Union". His comments came eight years on from the declaration of the result of the Brexit referendum. He urged Scots to back his party if they believe "Brexit was a mistake". Labour's Shadow Chancellor, Rachel Reeves, said while the party would not be "revisiting" the Brexit decision, the party wanted closer ties with the EU. While CAMPAIGNing in Scotland, she said: "We do want to forge a closer relationship to make it easier for great British businesses, great Scottish businesses to export. "We want a reset of our relationship with our friends and partners in the European Union - we think that is in the UK's national interest to do so." Graphic    CRITICISM Swinney wants to rejoin Load-Date: June 25, 2024  End of Document
