   Taking responsibility for Brexit failures; Letters to the Editor The Times (London) June 19, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 18 Length: 474 words Body   Sir, At last someone telling it like it is ("Brexit failed, right? So why's Nigel off the hook", Hugo Rifkind, Jun 18). Brexit is a continuing disaster but people are afraid to say so because it feels like a call to revisit the EU referendum, with all the agonies of that tortuous debate and the debacle of the exit negotiations. Meanwhile Nigel Farage is somehow championed as a man of truth and principle. Like most voters (if the polls are to be believed) I want a change from the Tories and I am desperately hoping for competence as well as stability. But we will also need an effective and an honourable opposition, and Farage does not offer either. Gerald Cook Nottingham Sir, Hugo Rifkind is spot on: Nigel Farage is indeed being let off the hook about Brexit. But there is winning the argument and there is changing reality. The road to the latter, should Labour attempt to walk it, promises to be both long and winding. Negotiations on any deal to improve trading terms will be tortuous, and the EU will not do us any favours. Farage is wrong. But it is not clear that there is much of substance that we can do about it. Professor Anand Menon Director, UK in a Changing Europe Sir, I was delighted to read Tom Howard's article highlighting how the London stock market had overtaken that of Paris ("Investors flee anxious Paris for London", Jun 18). This counters the general sentiment that our country has gone to the wall. We should start to accept that with Brexit, the pandemic and the energy shock the UK is performing well compared with our neighbours. It is also positive that we are likely to select a centrist government rather than lurching to the extremes. George Thomas Banbury, Oxon Sir, Simon French ("Own goals seem to have cost the Tories, but Labour should beware", Jun 17) is a tad harsh when he says: "Brexit was an event and a fallout that Conservatives must own. It was on their watch, was their political project, is their damage." Not so. David Cameron's government strongly recommended a Remain vote but was defeated by a cross-party Brexit campaign and a very silent Labour Party leader. David Hoggett Winchester Sir, Hugo Rifkind reflects on why Nigel Farage's patently misleading account of political affairs has not been debunked. He is correct that Brexit has been an undeniable failure but Farage postures as if it were a success, if only he could manage it. So it is with populists: simple solutions, once they are seen to fail, are the fault of others' mismanagement. We had unfettered access to a market of half a billion people, all thrown away on the altar of a man whose view of the UK is stuck in the 1940s and who is fixated with stopping the boats - which have got worse since Brexit. As ever, populists state what people want to hear but have no realistic policy to achieve it. Gerard Connolly London SW11 Load-Date: June 19, 2024  End of Document
