   Talks with Labour MP over Brexit ‘frictions’ Jersey Evening Post April 27, 2024 Saturday  Copyright 2024 Jersey Evening Post All Rights Reserved  Length: 464 words Byline: By Tom Innes , tinnes@jerseyeveningpost.com Body   CONTINUING “friction” arising from Brexit has been discussed by the External Relations Minister and a member of the Shadow Cabinet as part of Jersey anticipating a change in the UK’s government later this year. Questioned during a Scrutiny hearing about what he was doing to tackle Brexit-related challenges, the minister – Deputy Ian Gorst – said officials in Jersey were working hard on a range of issues, but that he was also alive to the prospect of UK voters electing a Labour government at the next general election. “What I think will change the dynamic is a change in government in Westminster,” he said. “I have met Nick Thomas-Symonds from the shadow team. His mandate is to deal with some of the friction that’s resulted from Brexit, which is one of Labour’s top priorities.” Deputy Gorst’s admission is one of the clearest signals so far that the Island’s government is preparing the ground for a possible shift of power after the UK goes to the polls, with the election due to take place – on a date chosen by Prime Minister Rishi Sunak – between June this year and January 2025. The Labour Party has held a commanding opinion poll lead over Mr Sunak’s Conservatives since autumn 2022, with the most recent indication showing that around 43% of the electorate would vote Labour, while 23% would support the Tories. Mr Thomas-Symonds has been Labour MP for Torfaen in south Wales since 2015 and is the shadow minister without portfolio. Among the Brexit-related topics mentioned by Deputy Gorst to the Economic and International Affairs Scrutiny Panel were trips by French citizens to Jersey, the ability of Jersey fishing boats to land their catches directly in France and free trade agreements. Goodwill between Jersey and regional officials in La Manche, Normandy, was a helpful background, he added, but some issues relating to Brexit had to be resolved between the UK and the European Union and could not be taken care of at local level. He said that a facility to receive fish in Normandy was about to be the subject of a formal application to Brussels from La Manche, although he conceded that a quick resolution to this matter was unlikely, given it had been the subject of discussions for at least five years. Panel chair Deputy Montfort Tadier asked whether the continuing fallout from Brexit could affect future projects such as the construction of an offshore wind farm in Jersey’s territorial waters, or a fixed bridge or tunnel link to the European mainland. Deputy Gorst said: “If that [fixed link] project is premised on the free movement of people and where they are taxed, that’s a decision for Brussels. The goodwill we have with France is important as a starting point, but the key to unlocking both of those projects is a Brussels competency, not a French one.” Load-Date: April 28, 2024  End of Document
