   The Brexit messiah needs a new parable The Times (London) June 5, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 721 words Byline: Tom Peck Body   Nigel Farage walks into Clacton Wetherspoons like Sean Connery at the end of Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves. The return of the king. The prodigal son. Paul Gascoigne once went straight from the Wembley pitch to a pub in Hampstead, still in his full England kit. Even he won't have got a reception quite like this one. "Go on, Nigel, my son!" "We love you, Nigel!" "Nigel! Nigel! Nigel! Nigel! Nigel!" The scenes in the Moon and Starfish are like the bit in Being John Malkovich where the only word anyone is capable of saying is Malkovich, over and over again, except this isn't Being John Malkovich; it's Being Nigel Farage. There is, at this specific moment, little to suggest that in about an hour he'll be exiting the same building to be covered in banana milkshake and have to begin his open-top bus tour hiding on the bottom deck with an aide and a flannel. A pint is ordered. A queue is formed for selfies with the main man. In the roughly ten-second gap between photocalls, the pint is consumed in full. When a beverage gets sucked into the Farage orbit, it does not survive for long. Later the woman lurking by the pub steps delivers her banana-based payload in two explosive seconds. This, for Farage, is medium pace. On the seafront, so packed are the gathered masses that Reform UK's leader can hardly make it down the boardwalk to the pier. The bridges above the streets are standing room only. By the time he makes it down to the sea, it can't be ruled out that at least some of the crowd are expecting him to just keep going. And did those brogues in ancient time There was barely 24 hours to organise Farage's "election campaign launch" on Clacton seafront. The production values are thrillingly low. Just a stepladder, a microphone and a pier. But, my word, there's a crowd. Mainly people clap. "Bravo! Bravo!" "Welcome to Clacton, Nigel!" It's a town he knows well. The beaches of Clacton are Brexit's birthing grounds, to which Farage has returned over the past decade with the rhythmic certainty of a gestating giant turtle. When Douglas Carswell won here for Ukip at the general election in 2015, the UK's path out of the European Union opened up in earnest. Farage came here many times then. He was back over and over again in 2016, and again in 2019 with the Brexit Party for the European elections. They keep voting for him, over and over again, in whatever iteration he arrives, but somehow things don't ever seem to get better. They never quite make it to the promised land. But this time things are going to be different. This time he's come to claim the kingdom for himself. "Brexit wouldn't have happened without Clacton!" he shouts, and they cheer back. Eight years later it's not clear what they're cheering about. They followed his instructions but don't seem to have got a lot out of it. With no Brexit to sell, the Farage stump speech has taken a turn for the surreal. For the third time in four working days he's very angry about schools "poisoning the minds of our young people". This week is the 80th anniversary of D-Day and, just like yesterday, he's very annoyed that apparently fewer than half of 18 to 34- year-olds have heard of it. He's here, he reckons, "to reactivate the people's army". On this evidence it is very happy to be reactivated. The anti-Farage army has been reactivated too, of course. The great man shouts the rhetorical question, "What have I got to offer?" and in the rhetorical beat before he can move on to "blood, toil, tears and sweat" somebody shouts, "F*** all." But the disapprovers are tiny in number. Round here, what Farage wants he usually gets. On Monday the now exparty leader Richard Tice made way for him, effectively resigning in celebration on live TV. When the open-top bus tour begins, Farage eventually makes his way to the top deck, brow still wet. Ten rows back sits the now ex-candidate, Tony Mack, a local psychotherapist, jovially pointing out all the now pointless "Vote Tony Mack" signs he has been sticking up around town. Outside the Three Jays pub on the edge of town, there is a moment of history. On a beer garden table Nigel Farage signs his nomination papers, usurping Mack, who's sitting nursing a Diet Coke. He might have won. But then again he might not. Farage, on the other hand, is almost certainly going to, and that really will make history. Load-Date: June 5, 2024  End of Document
