   The verdict on Brexit: a success or failure?; Letters to the Editor The Times (London) June 21, 2024 Friday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 22 Length: 516 words Body   Sir, Iain Martin's article "You may hate Brexit but it's working out well" (Jun 20) is a welcome attempt to challenge Hugo Rifkind's verdict ("Brexit failed, right? So why's Nigel off the hook?", Jun 18) but contains two fallacies: first, that the binary choice we faced in 2016 was the only one; and second, that the EU would today be the same as it now is if, instead of Brexit, the UK had chosen another route.  The real problem with the EU was, and remains, political union; its major benefits are union on every other level - trade, defence, health, science, technology, the arts and education. Could the UK ever have had the pros without the con? In hindsight Maastricht was the moment the UK made the wrong choice. We will never know for sure whether Brexit was the best possible way to remedy that error, but whatever route the UK chose in 2016 would have been disruptive, to both parties. Nick Ritblat London NW8 Sir, Missing from the debate on whether Brexit has been a success or failure is the question of how it has affected Europe. Europe is a fractious, fissiparous and sometimes unlovely community of nations. But its stability, security and prosperity are vital to our own national wellbeing. The EU is the primary legislative and regulatory body in Europe, and Europe's future depends largely on how well the EU performs its various functions. Our departure from the formal and informal systems of influence and decision-making has not helped. The UK should have remained as a strong, committed member helping to balance the federalist tendencies of some states and the bolshiness of others. The EU has been weakened by the UK's departure and a weaker EU is less able to support the development of a stable, secure and prosperous Europe. This is undoubtedly to our own long-term detriment. Our next government must do everything possible to rebuild our influence in the EU and in Europe more widely. It is a vital strategic interest for our nation. David Thomas Great Denham, Beds Sir, Iain Martin believes that an upside of Brexit was the restoration of sovereignty. Yet since the Windsor framework was agreed in March last year it is now accepted that Northern Ireland must remain within the EU regulatory orbit in a way that does not apply to the rest of the UK. This serves to emphasise that it was never going to be possible for the UK to leave the EU as it was supposed to, as one nation state. Surely the restoration of sovereignty was never meant to look like this? Graham Davies Bogotá, Colombia Sir, Is Brexit a failure? Hugo Rifkind and some of your correspondents (Jun 19) seem to forget that many of us saw that it was important to leave an organisation that was becoming increasingly corrupt, a threat to the sovereignty of the UK parliament, and damaging to the standing of the British monarchy. For this successful outcome, a 4 per cent diminution in our long-term productivity seems a reasonable price to pay. Richard Wellesley London SW14 Letters to the Editor must be exclusive to The Times and may be edited. Please include a full address and daytime telephone number. Load-Date: June 21, 2024  End of Document
