   Top Labour official Fiona Urquhart reveals party's goal is to restore freedom of movement with EU - as Tories warn the real aim is to reverse Brexit MailOnline June 8, 2024 Saturday 9:47 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:2 Length: 815 words Byline: Anna Mikhailova Body   A senior Labour figure has said the party will bring back freedom of movement in bombshell comments seen by The Mail on Sunday. They reveal plans for a Labour government to reopen Brexit talks and claim that 'restoring freedom of movement is paramount'. Last night senior Conservatives accused Sir Keir Starmer of 'lying' to the British public about his plans. Former Tory party leader Sir Iain Duncan Smith said: 'This is stage one, two and three of re-entering the European Union.' Fiona Urquhart, chairman of Labour International, the group tasked with rallying expats to vote for Labour in next month's election, has also pledged to give EU-based Britons their own MP in Westminster. She also appeared to admit Labour is not being upfront with its plans ahead of the election, saying: 'The party is being cautious, it's not making too many bold announcements because, should it come to power, it does not know what it's going to be faced with. 'But I can't stress enough that it is well aware of many of the problems facing Britons overseas, especially in the EU.' In the interview with a Mallorca local newspaper she said: 'Should Labour win the next election, it is prepared to revisit some of the Brexit agreements, such as the Windsor Agreement and make it easier for Britons to come and go in Europe. 'Restoring that freedom of movement is paramount and a meeting to discuss the Trade and Cooperation agreement has already been agreed on for 2026.' She also said: 'The Labour Party has made it clear that it wants to see a greater level of freedom of movement within the EU for Britons, in particular for professionals and trade.' This could include scrapping the 90-day rule [the cumulative duration of any stay in the EU within a 180-day period] and boosting EU-living Britons' pensions. Ms Urquhart added: 'It would have to be part of a bigger deal.' A Labour source last night insisted this was not official party policy. But Sir Iain said: 'The EU has made its absolutely clear it is not prepared to allow freedom of movement solely for British citizens, and that this would have to be a new negotiation. 'What Labour are running is a subterranean pro-EU campaign which will surface the day after election day. 'Most Labour MPs will vote for it and it will be re-entry through the back door.' He added Ms Urquhart's interview has 'blown the gaff on their real plans'.  'Former Brexit Secretary David Davis said: 'You won't get free movement solely for Brits. This is a lie, a nonsense. The trade-off will be going back to full free movement. 'If this is Labour policy they should say so loud and clear, not to sneak it in a Mallorca newspaper.' It comes after former prime minister Boris Johnson warned Sir Keir would drag the UK back into the EU in all but name if he becomes PM. Writing in yesterday's Daily Mail Mr Johnson said there was a 'gigantic Labour conspiracy of silence' over its Brexit plans. In the interview, aimed at Britons living in the EU, Ms Urquhart said Labour is the only party willing to 'resolve' Brexit, while admitting it is 'too late' to reverse it.  'Closer working relations have to be struck and the only party which has made it clear it is prepared to go down that route is Labour.' On giving EU Britons their own representation in Westminster she said: 'MPs for Britons overseas could eventually become a reality under a Labour government. 'While the UK does not have MPs representing Britons abroad like France or Italy, as a result of Brexit Britons no longer have an MEP to refer to when they have problems. Yes, there is the Foreign Office but it is more concerned about trade than it is with the problems individual Britons face.' Labour International is a Constituency Labour Party and therefore represented on the National Policy Forum.  It has been liaising with Ellie Reeves, Labour's deputy national campaign coordinator, about its campaign to rally expats to vote Labour, which has also been discussed in recent National Executive Committee meetings. Overseas voters are a significant constituency in this election for the first time. Rules that came in this year mean 3.5million adults are now eligible to vote. Several of Labour International's senior members, including Ms Urquhart, are founders of the Labour Campaign for Free Movement. Ms Urquhart also told the Mallorca newspaper in March that Brexit was not 'thought through properly'. A Labour spokesman said: 'None of this is our policy. We've left the EU and Labour is clear we're not going back. That means no return to the single market, customs union or freedom of movement.' A Labour International spokesman said: 'Keir Starmer has made it clear that we should make a serious attempt to get an improved post-Brexit deal for the UK. 'Our chair is clear that she is referring to freedom of movement within the EU for British citizens. This is a different issue to movement between the EU and the UK.' Load-Date: June 9, 2024  End of Document
