   UK plagued by post-Brexit customs uncertainty: report   Philippines Daily Inquirer May 20, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 Philippines Daily Inquirer All Rights Reserved  Length: 576 words Body    Britain's post-Brexit border with the EU has been plagued by chronic delays and uncertainty, ramping up costs for businesses and the government, the nation's spending watchdog said on Monday. The UK departed from the European Union in January 2021 following a standstill transition period but has still yet to complete full implementation of post-Brexit customs controls. 'The UK leaving the EU created a large-scale change in arrangements for the movement of goods across the border,' said National Audit Office (NAO) boss Gareth Davies in a report on the situation. 'However, more than three years after the end of the transition period, it is still not clear when full controls will be in place.' READ: Post-Brexit checks on UK-bound EU food imports delayed again: FT When the UK left the European single market and customs union on Jan 1, 2021, the EU immediately implemented customs controls for goods from the United Kingdom heading into the bloc. However the UK government has delayed the introduction of customs checks five times for goods heading into the country, citing delays with infrastructure and technology. Controls on imports of food, plant, and animal products from the EU, have now belatedly begun but not in their entirety. UK businesses have complained that the lack of checks on EU imports put their continental competitors at an advantage and that they are having to pass on higher administration costs to customers. 'The government has repeatedly changed and deferred its plans for the introduction of full import controls following the UK's exit from the European Union,' the NAO report added on Monday. 'This has caused uncertainty for businesses and extra costs for government and ports.' The NAO also slammed the UK government for having 'no clear timetable' for finalizing full controls. 'Administrative burdens' 'Since the UK left the EU, border processes have operated largely as intended, but traders face increasing additional costs and administrative burdens,' it said. READ: UK announces post-Brexit farming scheme 'Government intends to introduce most of the remaining import controls during 2024 but it is still not clear when full controls will be in place.' Britain will have spent at least £4.7 billion to implement new border arrangements and improve the border - of which £2.6 billion had been spent by March 2023 - yet still has no plan for a 'full' customs regime, according to the watchdog. 'The repeated delays in introducing import controls, and difficulties forecasting requirements, have resulted in government expenditure on infrastructure and staff that were ultimately not needed,' it added. 'Late announcements about policy and uncertainty about the implementation of controls have also reduced the ability of businesses and ports to prepare for changes.' However, a government spokesperson said that 'we are making good progress, having successfully rolled out new checks in January and April this year while taking a pragmatic approach which minimizes disruption. READ: Battling Brexit, some British firms turn to invest in Europe 'To support traders, we are also launching the Single Trade Window, a single secure gateway, which will make it easier for traders to provide information to the government when importing goods,' added the spokesperson. Britain voted to leave the EU in a knife-edge 2016 referendum after Brexiteers, including former Prime Minister Boris Johnson, promised 'sunlit uplands' of economic prosperity. Load-Date: May 21, 2024  End of Document
