   We'll always make pitch to be in Europe Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 24, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 9 Length: 742 words Byline: STEPHEN FLYNN Body   THIS article isn't easy to put together, because at the time of writing, I am none the wiser on how Scotland got on last night. We could all be waking up this morning in a state of massive disappointment or in a state of complete euphoria. Our European journey could be over, or we might just be getting started. Here's the thing though, whichever way it went, the one thing the last couple weeks have proven is that we belong at major championships and the Tartan Army deserves more summers like this. Scotland belongs in Europe. Turning back to politics, getting back into Europe is something you haven't heard too much about during this Westminster election campaign. For our part in the SNP, it hasn't been for the want of trying. That £is the bill we living every STEPHEN TO OVERTURN The truth is, there is one reason and one reason only why Brexit hasn't been mentioned much - the main Westminster parties don't want you to hear about it, think about it and definitely not talk about it. The silence suits them, so they have tried to silence any debate on Brexit. I don't think they should be allowed off the hook that easily. And today just so happens to be the eighth anniversary of the Brexit referendum result, the day Cameron whistled himself off into the sunset and the day that a certain Nigel Farage's pet project became official British policy. So, eight years on, today is as good a chance as any in this election to start finally talking about and thinking about the disaster that Westminster inflicted on our country. A disaster signed, sealed, and delivered by Westminster despite the fact Scotland knew it was madness from day one. We all know what has happened since. After years of chaos, what eventually became Boris Johnson's Brexit has cost Scotland billions, pushed food prices up, hurt our NHS, choked off economic growth and sent the cost-of-living crisis soaring. Brexit wasn't so much a policy, it was an act of self-punishment. In this election, both Labour and the Tories have said they are focused on the economy. But both now fully back Brexit and it seems eight years on they still can't see the contradiction as no party can say a stronger economy is its priority while committing to staying out of the EU. Last week, the independent Institute for Fiscal Studies gave its approval to SNP figures that showed Brexit was costing the public purse £30billion a year. That massive figure would be enough to scrap the child poverty producing two-child cap 10 times over. That £30billion is the Brexit bill we are living with every single year and we shouldn't let this election go by without asking why we're all asked to pay it. Now, it will come as no surprise that the SNP believes we should return to the European Union with independence. That is the future we will always offer the Scottish people. While we are still in Westminster, though, we will work to undo as much Brexit damage as possible. 30bn Brexit are with In total, economists now reckon Brexit has already cost £140billion. year FLYNN FIGHTS BREXIT It's common sense to know you can't back business and back Brexit and you can't prioritise economic growth while refusing to rejoin the biggest single market in the world. So, on the economy, the SNP will hold the incoming UK Labour government to the very test they've set for themselves. If growing the economy is really their priority, then SNP MPs will introduce a binding vote for a negotiated return to the European single market. That is the only logical and sensible way to stimulate economic growth and to stop the ongoing harm of Brexit. If the public are being asked to trust Sir Keir Starmer when he tells them his priority is economic growth, then he will have no credible reason to oppose us. With only 10 days left until the polls, it's time to finally deal with the Brexit elephant that's been in the room for the last eight years. It's time to stop the stupid slogans, whether it's Boris Johnson's "Get Brexit Done" or Sir Keir Starmer's "Make Brexit Work". It's time to wake up to the reality of the £30billion Brexit bill none of us can pay. The SNP believe in a future beyond broken, Brexit Britain. We believe in offering people a way back into the EU and the real change if offers. We believe that what applies to football should apply to politics too - we believe it's good to be part of Europe, where we belong. That £30bn is the Brexit bill we are living with every year STEPHEN FLYNN FIGHTS TO OVERTURN BREXIT Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
