   What Labour is reading; The freethinking economist Paul Collier turns to Brexit-voting 'left-behind' communities The Sunday Times (London) June 16, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: CULTURE;FEATURES; Pg. 23 Length: 977 words Byline: Jason Cowley Body   Society Left Behind A New Economics for Neglected Places by Paul Collier Allen Lane £25 pp304 In The Future of Capitalism, published in 2018, Paul Collier offered fascinating personal insight into why, since the Brexit referendum, he has written repeatedly about what he calls the left-behind places of Britain, most particularly South Yorkshire, where he grew up in a working-class family. He was educated at the local grammar school in Sheffield and at Oxford, and then had a successful career as an author and development economist at the Blavatnik School of Government at the University of Oxford. His cousin Sue was not so fortunate. She was a teenage single mother and her life was troubled. Many decades later Collier and his wife adopted Sue's grandchildren, who had been taken into care. The adoption process was tortuous: the Colliers were forced to jump through a series of bureaucratic hoops, and yet all they wanted was to offer these vulnerable children a loving and stable home. IMAGES The Future of Capitalism was one of the most important books of the immediate post-Brexit period: Collier was a Remainer but wanted his readers to understand why so many working-class voters GETTY COATES, opted for Brexit, apparently against their best economic interests, or so they were told JOANNE by David Cameron. For Collier Brexit was for many a mutiny against an intolerable status quo. It was widely read by senior Labour politicians. Angela Rayner has privately called it her favourite book. But some in Labour are suspicious of Collier because of remarks he has made about immigration and the need for social cohesion. They think he is a nationalist ? a strange thing to say of an academic who has spent his working life studying poor societies. He remains on the outside. That may be about to change. I understand that Lisa Nandy, the shadow minister for international development, is interested in his new book, Left Behind, which is not just about Britain ? although there are long sections on South Yorkshire, described here as "the poorest region in England" ? but more about what Collier calls "left-behind countries". Why, he asks, do some states thrive ? he cites Singapore, Botswana and China under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping ? while others fail? What makes for good public policy? Why is Denmark under the Social Democratic prime minister Mette Frederiksen one of the most cohesive and least unequal countries in the world, while "class-ridden" Britain remains spatially and economically so divided? Collier attempts to answer these questions and in doing so tells us what he dislikes ? free-market dogmatism, state socialism, overcentralisation ? and what he likes ? devolution, communitarianism, reciprocal obligations, a politics of the common good and contributive justice. Collier says he is not on the left or right but occupies the "hard centre": what matters to him is pragmatism and a willingness to adapt to context. He dislikes "place-blind policy" and those policymakers in Britain who consider the "market knows best and the Treasury knows best of all". He used to teach the ideas of the economist Milton Friedman with enthusiasm but turned against liberal capitalist universalism: too many people were suffering, there was a widening gulf between booming regions and cities and left-behind places. He cites examples in Germany and America where public and private finance allowed cities to recover from the loss of their steel industries and contrasts this with what happened in Sheffield, which struggled to renew itself. Left Behind is full of good ideas but its ambition can be overwhelming. It is episodic and written in short, discrete sections. There are multiple case studies and extensive footnotes and digressions. Collier cares deeply about the condition of England and mourns the diminished lives of those like his cousin Sue. He describes a "syndrome of fragility": "Men lose their jobs, families collapse, people selfmedicate on drugs and kids grow up in broken homes." But his experience as a development economist means he's equally concerned about the plight of the "bottom billion" ? the great mass of humanity who live abject lives. The poorest countries, he warns, are getting poorer. In one section he analyses the corruption of Russia under the despotic rule of Putin, "the world's richest man", and then excoriates the ANC in South Africa for squandering the opportunities created by the leadership of Nelson Mandela. He tells the story of how Lee Kuan Yew set about developing Singapore and united its three main ethnic groups along the way: Chinese, Malays and Indians. He contrasts Yew's achievements with what he calls the "near miss" of Julius Nyerere's Tanzania. Nyerere was another visionary postcolonial leader who understood the need to build trust in his leadership as well as shared identity among citizens, but was undone by poor economic decision making. At times Collier can be too forgiving of autocracy. The leadership of Deng may have lifted hundreds of millions of Chinese out of poverty, but he also presided over Beijing's Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989. Paul Kagame, an ethnic Tutsi, united Rwanda after the 1994 genocide, creating through iron will a stable and increasingly prosperous country. Collier describes walking through the streets of the capital, Kigali, at midnight and feeling safe. But Rwanda is an oppressive police state in which dissent is not tolerated. You don't have to agree with Collier, however, to enjoy this stimulating book, a call to heal the divisions in our societies by bringing justice to the left behind. It should be essential reading for the new Labour cabinet. BUY FROM OUR ONLINE BOOKSHOP All titles reviewed can be bought at www.timesbookshop.co.uk or call 020 3176 2935. Discount for Times+ members Paul Collier is the author of Angela Rayner's favourite book Graphic    Two-down Terraced housing in Yorkshire Load-Date: June 16, 2024  End of Document
