   What remains of the Brexit promises; For the first time, the British are not taking part in the European elections. Four and a half years ago, many citizens reaffirmed their vote to leave the EU - with high hopes. Mandoline Rutkowski explains what has changed Die Welt am Sonntag (English) June 2, 2024 Sunday  Copyright 2024 Axel Springer GmbH All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Pg. 3; No. 22 Length: 938 words Body   Migration should be restricted and better controlled, jobs should go to Brits first Few things have been conjured up by Brexit supporters as much as the promise to create more job opportunities for British workers by reducing immigration. Nigel Farage, founder of the Brexit party, portrayed immigrants from Eastern Europe who had come to work in the low-wage sector as social parasites. This particularly resonated with the impoverished working class in former industrial regions. Later on, however, only a few Britons were prepared to work in agriculture, care and catering themselves. The immediate consequence: after many Eastern Europeans returned to the EU, the harvest rotted in the fields. However, migration was not only to be curbed, but also better controlled ( "Take Back Control"). In theory, this promise was kept. The government introduced a points system that was supposed to give preference to highly qualified workers. But the reality is different. Net immigration was historically high last year at around 685,000 people. In 2015, it was 333,000. Instead of immigrants from the EU, people from India, Nigeria and China now predominate. The UK needs these immigrants not only in the low-wage sector, but also at universities, for example, where they pay higher tuition fees than locals - and thus keep the underfunded higher education system running. Leaving the EU has also created a new problem. Where migrants used to cross the open border hidden in trucks via the Eurotunnel, they now come across the English Channel from France in rubber dinghies. In 2023, 29,400 people entered the country in this way. At the end of the year, a total of 128,700 people were waiting for their asylum applications to be processed.The migration law passed in April, which provides for the expulsion of illegal immigrants to Rwanda, has not yet brought a single migrant out of the country. Finally foreign trade without onerous EU treaties and thus more prosperity for all citizens Brexit supporters argued that Brexit would allow the UK to free itself from EU regulation and thus grow economically. Among other things, the UK should be able to conclude more lucrative trade agreements directly with countries. But the opposite is the case. According to a study by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, gross domestic product (GDP) is two to three percent lower than it would be if the UK were still in the EU. According to the analysis, this corresponds to a loss of income of around 850 pounds per person per year. It is true that the government has concluded more than 70 new trade agreements since Brexit. However, many of these agreements merely replace previous EU treaties or only have a minor impact. For example, the CPTPP free trade agreement with the countries of the Asia-Pacific region has only increased GDP by 0.08 percent. Negotiations on a trade agreement with the USA and India are on hold. According to the Office for Budget Responsibility, all leading industrialized nations (G7) were able to bring their trade volume back to the pre-pandemic level of 2019. Only one country from this group is lagging behind: the UK. More money for hospitals, doctors and nursing staff instead of bureaucracy in Brussels With a bright red Brexit campaign bus, labeled with the words "We pay 350 million pounds to the EU every week, let's put the money into the NHS instead ", the "Leave" advocates propagated more investment in the NHS public health service. However, they were not so precise when it came to the facts. According to calculations by the think tank "UK in a Changing Europe ", payments to the EU amounted to around 250 million pounds per week in 2014 - 100 million pounds less than reported in the campaign. Now, four years after leaving the European Union, it is clear that hardly any of the EU contributions saved since then have reached the healthcare system. In view of years of underfunding and staff shortages, a group of healthcare experts recently called for a "national state of emergency" to be declared for the healthcare sector. Around 7.5 million patients are currently waiting for medical treatment. Working conditions for employees are precarious and doctors' strikes are now part of everyday life in the UK. An end to the many EU regulations and more national laws instead As a member of the alliance, the UK was bound by EU law, for example with regard to workers' rights, agricultural regulations, environmental and food standards. This is why Brexit supporters were particularly vocal about the European Court of Justice (ECJ), which can sanction members for violations. In their eyes, the court was representative of all democratically insufficiently legitimized institutions that interfered in the domestic political affairs of the British. By leaving, they wanted to break free from these shackles completely. But instead of a liberating blow, the British authorities got bogged down in regulations. Around 4,800 EU legal provisions remained in British law after Brexit in order to avoid any sudden gaps in the law. All standards were supposed to be revised or declared invalid by the deadline of December 31, 2023. However, the government in London has long since abandoned this goal in order to avoid "legal ambiguities". The result: by the end of last year, only around 600 EU laws had been abolished. Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word. Document original Load-Date: June 1, 2024  End of Document
