   When will we break the Brexit omerta?; Once, politicians talked of little else. But in this election campaign, party leaders don't dare bring it up. Tim Shipman analyses why The Sunday Times (London) June 23, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 17 Length: 1842 words Body   ight years ago today, Britain voted to leave the European Union. Most of us remember where we were when we heard the news, or at the very least spent much of the succeeding five years hearing of little else. E Brexit eventually became a fact, though one which remains disputed, a cultural signifier as much as an ideological divide. Five years ago "get Brexit done" was the defining issue of the general election campaign, powering Boris Johnson to a sizeable majority. This time, however, it is the elephant in the room, the awkward uncle who turns up at Christmas about whom everyone seems to agree it would be best to say nothing. Almost no one, not the Tories, not Labour, not even Nigel Farage's Reform Party is really talking about this historic political, cultural and geopolitical decision, despite the fact that its consequences continue to affect our economic fortunes, and many of its kinks are a long way from being ironed out. So when are we going to finally break our Brexit omerta? The door opened just a crack on Monday when Rachel Reeves, Labour's shadow chancellor, gave an interview to the Financial Times declaring: "We would look to improve our trading relationship with Europe, and do trade deals around the world." If this looked like a breaking of the Brexit silence, it was only in part. Labour had not put an EU statement in their "grid" of campaign events. Reeves just answered a question and said "much the same" as Starmer has said before, a Labour source claimed. Transition talks between Labour and the civil service are well advanced in some departments, particularly the Foreign Office, where officials are preparing for a Nato summit, four days after Sir Keir Starmer is expected to become prime minister. That will be followed by a summit of the European Political Community, which the prime minister will host. "That's where you can expect Starmer to start telling his EU counterparts how he wants our relationship with them to evolve," says one senior civil servant. What might he say? "Most of us still have no real idea. Everything's rather vague." The political parties aren't the only ones avoiding the issue. Brexit is low down the list of priorities for voters. Luke Tryl, a former Tory adviser who runs focus groups for More in Common, says: "No one ever brings it up unprompted in groups. It's like the forgotten event. People visibly recoil from the idea of reopening the debates. What you don't find, says Tryl, is a sense that Britain's problems are related to Brexit. "They put the blame on the Tories messing up and global events." Starmer views things the same way. "The economy was stuttering before 2016, and certainly before 2019 when we actually came out of the EU," he says. "So the argument that all our economic woes are somehow bound up in our relationship with the EU, I've never been persuaded of. Because we hadn't had significant economic growth between 2010 and 2019. "Secondly, if you look at the inhibitors of growth: planning is a major inhibitor; getting the [electricity] grid to work properly is a major inhibitor; not having an industrial policy that actually works. It's a bit of a warm bath to suggest the relationship with the EU is the be-all and end-all." That the nation wishes the Brexit vote had gone differently is increasingly clear. A YouGov survey in May found that 58 per cent of voters thought Britain was wrong to leave the EU; 31 per cent believed it was right to leave. Unsurprisingly then, surveys suggest that about 60 per cent of voters now wish there had been a Remain vote in 2016, but things are less clear cut when they are asked what should happen next. A recent YouGov survey found that while 51 per cent of voters want to rejoin the EU, just 33 per cent hold that view strongly. The results showed that 36 per cent are opposed, 25 per cent strongly. Voters back rejoining the single market by 42 per cent to 22 per cent. This policy is being backed in the election by the Liberal Democrats, who wanted to revoke Brexit in 2019. But Lib Dem strategists admit that even they are not talking up Brexit this time since they need the backing of Leave voters to gain Tory-held seats in the West Country. Perhaps some of our ambivalence can be attributed to the fact that attempts to calculate the effects of Brexit quickly run into disputes about the modelling. Even Leave advocates concede that the trade barriers that have gone up have had a negative effect. The Office of Budget Responsibility (OBR), the government's economic watchdog, says the economy is 4 per cent smaller than it would have been if the UK had stayed in the EU. But Brexiteers question these numbers, citing academic studies showing that firms that trade outside the EU - an area of growth for Britain - have better productivity than those doing business within it. Our economic performance relative to our neighbours is also disputed. Under the entire 14-year span of the Conservative government, the UK's GDP growth of nearly 24 per cent is higher than Germany (21 per cent) and France (16 per cent). But if you measure from the end of 2019, when both Brexit and the pandemic began to bite, growth was just 1.7 per cent in the UK, compared with 2.2 per cent in France and 3.4 per cent across the Eurozone. Only Germany, of the major economies, with 0.6 per cent, was worse. When Kemi Badenoch, the trade secretary, addressed MPs just before the election campaign began, she focused on the period since the referendum, where the UK's growth of 8 per cent is comparable to France and better than Germany. "Brexit was a vote of confidence by the British people in our country - and it's working," she has emphasised. Labour hit back, pointing out that foreign direct investment is down nearly 30 per cent since 2016-17. British exports in the past decade have grown more slowly than those of any other member of the G7 besides Japan. Badenoch also said this weekend that Labour would unpick Brexit. "This is a ten or 20-year project," she told the Telegraph. "It's like you're cooking something and, five minutes later, it's not cooked yet, it's not working, let's stop. "Making sure everyone is focused on getting those benefits is absolutely critical. That's something that's going to disappear if Labour come in. They're just going to copy what the EU does." So who to believe? When questioned on Brexit during Thursday's leaders' debate, Rishi Sunak, who has called himself the "original Brexiteer", argued that you "don't have to go far" to see the benefits of Brexit today. "In Teesside there's something called freeports," the prime minister said, "which is a special investment zone we created using our freedoms from Brexit. It's attracting billions of pounds of investment, creating thousands of incredibly high-quality jobs. That's just one of the examples." David Henig, a trade expert who has been critical of Brexit, says the Conservative government joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, the Far East trade area, was "a significant political achievement" and, on the positive side of the ledger, he also points to new digital trade agreements with Singapore and Ukraine, and mutual recognition of financial services with Switzerland. However, Henig argues that policy since the referendum was driven by far too much wishful thinking. "All reputable pre-Brexit forecasts suggested that global trade deals would not compensate for the economic loss of erecting barriers to the EU," he says. "These have proved to be broadly accurate. Goods exports have suffered more than the traditionally strong British services sector." What everyone does agree on is that the next government, whichever it is, needs to kickstart growth or face further cuts to public services or tax rises. Reeves's economic policy is effectively a gamble on growth; a new deal or deals with the EU is part of that. Last week she suggested Labour would seek closer alignment with EU rules on the chemicals sector and a deal on the mutual recognition of professional qualifications, which could benefit lawyers and financiers in the City of London. Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow Cabinet Office spokesman, has also begun work on two other significant Labour "asks" - a veterinary deal that would allow easier trade in animal products, food and plants, in exchange for alignment with EU rules, plus a Europewide security deal in the shadow of the war in Ukraine. Labour has also suggested it would like to lift restrictions on bands and orchestras touring in the EU - a sectoral mobility deal. In fact, Whitehall officials say an agreement has been thrashed out, except for one or two EU member states. "It's as good as done," an official revealed. EU officials are also keen on a security deal, but Brussels sources were quick to point out that they would have "offensive interests" of their own in any trade talks. The European Commission has been pushing the idea of a youth mobility deal, allowing Britons aged 18 to 30 to visit one EU country to study or work for up to four years - in return for all EU citizens of that age group being allowed to come to the UK in unlimited numbers. Labour has ruled this out, along with membership of the single market or the customs union. EU sources also say they would demand greater access to the UK's fishing waters, a bugbear of the French. The Trade and Co-operation Agreement, signed on December 30, 2020, which governs UK-EU trade relations, is due to be revisited in 2025 but even Charles Grant, the Europhile head of the Centre for European Reform, says it will be "very difficult" to make progress. Tory ministers believe Labour is naive about how difficult it will be to get concessions from Brussels on trade or greater co-operation on curbing illegal immigration across the Channel. "They seem to think that turning up and not being evil Tories will solve all their problems," says a senior cabinet minister. "The French, for example, will absorb any amount of goodwill you send their way. They will be very friendly. Starmer will be invited to some amazing dinners. But if you get within a hundred miles of anything they think might impinge on their national interest they will turn around and say, 'Non.' You do things for them and they will take them, but if you ask for a quid pro quo, they say: 'But this is our national interest.'" Some Whitehall officials believe Labour has a tentative agreement with the French on the return of illegal migrants and plans to announce it after the election. But to complicate matters further, Emmanuel Macron, the French president, is locked in an election battle with the hard right in France. "When you're trying to beat the populist right, I would have thought the first thing to be sacrificed would be any sort of deal to return illegal immigrants," says the senior minister. Whatever happens, it seems likely that Brexit will be talked about more after the general election than before it. Additional reporting: Josh Glancy Kemi Badenoch says it's a ten to 20-year project and Labour would unpick it Load-Date: June 23, 2024  End of Document
