   You may hate Brexit but it's working out well; Leaving the EU has been slated as the source of all our woes but, believe me, it contains the seeds of future prosperity The Times (London) June 20, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 25 Length: 989 words Byline: Iain Martin Body   Alot has gone wrong since Boris Johnson led the Tory party to a thumping victory in 2019. Six weeks later, the first case of Covid was documented in the UK on January 31, 2020 and that same evening, at midnight, Britain left the European Union. Yet one of the curiosities of the current election campaign is how little either of those two giant events is mentioned by the major parties. Covid we all want to forget, fine. But for Brexit, the most controversial change in our governing arrangements since 1973, to be barely mentioned at all - that's a bit odd, isn't it? Particularly since we all know it has been such a colossal failure. My colleague Hugo Rifkind wrote earlier this week on these pages that it was incontrovertibly so. I am going to disagree and make the unfashionable case that far from it being a disaster, leaving the EU stands as the signal achievement of the last parliament. It has strengthened our democracy and opened up opportunities in the world that are the basis for future prosperity. There's no doubt that Brexit is now deeply unpopular with the electorate. How could anything so closely associated with the stricken, ruined Conservative Party be anything other? It is also the case that Brexit has created problems with increased paperwork and costs for businesses that import and export, particularly through ports such as Dover. In October those problems will get more complicated if the EU goes ahead with the delayed launch of its biometric Entry/Exit System (EES). Drivers and passengers entering the EU will be stopped to have their fingerprints and a picture taken, every time. In prospect are queues and disruption at major airports across the EU as it hits tourists from all non-EU countries. At Dover, a choke point for lorries delivering just-intime supply chains in both directions, the chaos could be worse. In such circumstances, Remainers will say the answer is easy: Britain should simply rejoin the EU. But Sir Keir Starmer has said that he is not going to rejoin the single market and customs union. Instead, he plans to foster warmer relations and secure improvements to our existing arrangements on a case-by-case basis. Softening the impact of EES will be a major test of this diplomatic approach. If Labour is to make meaningful progress in improving relations with our neighbours, it is important to set out on this complex venture with an honest assessment of Brexit, rather than wailing that it has all been a calamity. In essence, if moderate Brexiteers like me are expected to acknowledge the downsides of not being in the EU, and we do, those who dislike Brexit might also acknowledge the upsides. First on the upside is sovereignty. For those of us who voted for Brexit - and would vote for it again - this was about ensuring there was no one else to blame. This is working. The Tories are getting marmalised in part for losing control of immigration numbers and that is down to post- Brexit British policy. The Tories are now paying the electoral price for the record net migration figure of 745,000 in 2022, whereas in previous elections those in charge would have pointed to Brussels and said it was all part of a broader European problem. But there can be no buck-passing now. I doubt the new government, or any that follows, is going to be as lax again with migration when they see the evisceration it has inflicted on the Conservatives. One of the other democratic benefits of Brexit is that we are not involved in EU shenanigans such as those that took place on Sunday evening, when leaders fought with President Macron over the key unelected European Commission postings following the rightward tilt in the European elections. Major policy decisions on borders, regulations and markets are carved up by the EU without reference to national electorates. Although there is a perfectly respectable case for this form of supra-national government, if that is your thing, wouldn't we rather be able to fling from office those ultimately responsible when they fail, as is happening now in Britain? I would. And it is not as though leaving the EU has been an economic disaster. At worst it has made surprisingly little difference. Even the Office for Budget Responsibility's claim - often misquoted - that Brexit will cost 4 per cent of UK GDP is shaky. The OBR claims this will happen over the long term: by some economists' interpretations, over 15 years. But the implication for Remainers is that if we had stayed in the EU we would now magically have considerably higher growth than France, a neighbour and comparable economy. But why? France isn't growing much either. Germany has been in recession. Neither country left the EU. The claim that UK exports and imports would decline looks similarly fragile. The OBR claimed again last month that they would fall by 15 per cent in the long run. But in the eight years since the referendum, exports and imports have risen by 11.02 per cent and 11 per cent, according to the economist Catherine McBride. On greenfield investment - physical investment, not takeovers - the picture is positive. People want to invest in Britain. The Office for National Statistics reported late last year: "In 2021 and 2022, the UK overtook China to become the second-highest destination country for FDI [foreign direct investment] behind the United States." Outside the EU, Britain has already signed a list of trade agreements with fast-growing countries. There is the Aukus pact too, with the US and Australia. A vital component of this is sharing defence technology and innovation, which would not be feasible if we had chosen to have the industries of the future, AI and technology, regulated by Brussels. Of course we should strive for a better relationship with the EU but there is a balance to be struck. Brexit comes with considerable upsides and it contains the seeds of our future prosperity. At least we weren't subjected to Sunday's EU leader shenanigans Load-Date: June 20, 2024  End of Document
