   'I voted for Brexit - but nobody said it would stop me from living in Italy' i-news July 29, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 32 Length: 373 words Byline: Silvia Marchetti Body   A British couple in their sixties have bought a bargain Euro 15,000 (£13,000) three-bedroom house in Italy for their retirement - but they cannot get a visa to live in it because of post- Brexit travel rules. Greg Walter, from Winchester, says he voted for Brexit, but he now feels betrayed. "We were told Brexit was not going to impact our life abroad, that it would be just a matter of formality," Mr Walter, who used to work in construction, told i. "People who had second homes in Europe, or planned to buy one, were never given the correct information on the vote outcome." Mr Walter and his partner, Steph Appleton, purchased an old house in the town of Latronico in the Basilicata region of southern Italy last year and want to relocate to the village to enjoy a laid-back lifestyle. Post-Brexit rules mean they can only spend 90 in every 180 days in Italy, so they applied for a special visa for non- European Union citizens who have "passive income" from pensions, rentals or annuities. But the Italian authorities told them their savings of around £85,000 were not enough to get a visa - they need pensions (private or state) that meet the income threshold, and Ms Appleton will not get her state pension for two years. The former IT manager, who voted against Brexit, says she is frustrated and the unclear rules are giving her "a headache". Ms Appleton told i: "When we first applied last August we were confident that our savings and bank accounts, which amounted to roughly £85,000, would be more than enough." But after a few weeks the Italian consulate told them that the money they had accumulated did not qualify because most of it was not passive income, or pension. "The Italian authorities don't take into consideration savings in bank and savings accounts, they want pensions," said Ms Appleton. "It's been hell, bureaucracy at the Italian consulate is killing us. We suffer not being able to stay in Latronico for more than 90 every 180 days. We feel at home there and have invested money." For now, they are travelling back and forth in spring and summer. "The good thing is the new rules mean we go back to our family in the UK, the downside is we have to leave Latronico where our friends and our house are," said Ms Appleton. Load-Date: July 29, 2023  End of Document
