   'I'm ashamed over Brexit vote - I didn't know it would hit holidays' i-news September 4, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 25 Length: 499 words Byline: Silvia Marchetti Body   A50-year-old British man with Italian roots says he is ashamed of voting for Brexit as he explores his Sicilian ancestry in an effort to secure an Italian passport and leave the UK. Thomas (a pseudonym), a gardener from Hertfordshire, bought a farm near the Umbrian town of Foligno for Euro 50,000 (£43,000) 10 years ago, hoping to enjoy it in the holidays. He used to come and go, but under post-Brexit travel rules, he can only stay for a period of 90 in any 180 days. "I could kill myself for being so stupid, my Brexit vote contributed to the mayhem the UK is now in. It never occurred to me that my holidays in Italy could be affected… And I'm even half Italian," he told i. "I was pushed by a mere love for nationalism, for the ideal of sovereignty of our 'great kingdom'." By the time he realised it was just "poetry and rhetoric", he says, it was too late and now Thomas faces the hard consequences of his vote. When he visits Umbria and Sicily, he follows the trail of his ancestry to dig out documents that could help his Italian citizenship application. Thomas has embarked on a crusade to recover his Sicilian roots. His father was born in Syracuse in Sicily and migrated as a child to Hertford with his parents. But 30 years later, he renounced his Italian citizenship when he married a British woman and became British, which made it easier to find a job. When Thomas was born, his parents registered him as a British citizen. "I have asked two Sicilian lawyers to help me claim back my broken Italian ancestry," said Thomas. "Once I have found the necessary documents in Syracuse, I then need to re-register in Hertford as an Italian born in the UK. It's a huge hassle." The lawyers are collecting key documents on Thomas's ancestors, following a paper trail across Sicily to dig out from register offices the birth certificates of his father, grandfather, grandmother, all the way back to his great grandparents. "Luckily, these lawyers are locals and know several places where I can get access to all this information," says Thomas. "The more my ancestry line dates back, the higher are the chances of claiming my roots. In the past, there were no register offices in deep Sicily. Parishes, monasteries and convents are where many old birth certificates can still be found. I've toured a few." In the future Thomas, who is nearing retirement, would like to relocate to Foligno, in central Umbria, but he is aware that it might take him years to obtain an Italian passport. "My lawyers have managed to find my grandpa's birth certificate but, strangely, my father's hasn't popped up yet. Completing the paper trail might take another year and then four more years to get my Italian passport." Thomas regrets failing to consider the impact of Brexit, and overlooking his Italian roots. "I should have claimed my Italian passport when I was a teenager," he says. "Now I wouldn't be in such a mess." I could kill myself for being so stupid, my Brexit vote contributed to the mayhem the UK is now in Load-Date: September 3, 2023  End of Document
