   'Multiculturalism doesn't work. People are living in silos'; Richard Tice The leader of Reform UK says his party is not a 'one election' project and disaffected voters mean it stands a real chance of power in the long term. By Gordon Rayner The Sunday Telegraph (London) January 14, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 2523 words Byline: Gordon Rayner Body   Is Britain on the brink of a political paroxysm that could cut the string of the Tory/Labour yo-yo for good? Richard Tice is convinced it is, and that he stands a chance of being prime minister by 2029. The leader of Reform UK is not lacking in confidence or belief, but in fairness to him there is no point being in politics if you are plagued by self-doubt. In Tice's world view, voters are so fed up with the established order that they will vote for Reform (formerly the Brexit Party) in their millions, and if that vote share is not reflected in parliamentary seats, the clamour for change in the electoral system will be impossible to resist. A switch to proportional representation (PR) would then enable Reform to win the most seats in the next election but one, delivering prime minister Tice into Downing Street. This might sound like something Tice dreams about at night, only to wake to the cold reality of an immovable two party system, but it is undeniable that something is stirring in a disaffected electorate and that Reform will have a major say in who governs the country for the second half of the 2020s. "I genuinely believe that we are in the dying days of the last Conservative majority government in my lifetime," he says. "I view that as a very good thing." Tice is 59, and I don't ask him how long he expects to live, but he clearly believes the Tories will be out of power for decades. If they do lose this year's general election, Reform will be part of the reason, with current polls putting the Right-wing party on around 10 per cent of the vote share, or enough to prevent dozens of seats staying Conservative. Tice does not regard Reform as a party of protest, but one that is, in the long term (or medium term, as he puts it) seeking power. For his interview with The Telegraph, Tice has chosen a rented meeting room several floors up from his own flat in the Thames-side apartment building he calls home. One end of the room is dominated by floor to ceiling windows framing a picture perfect view of the Houses of Parliament a short distance downriver, rendered a sumptuous honey colour by the low afternoon sun. It is exactly the sort of swish, minimalist abode you would expect a millionaire political disrupter to live in, within walking distance of the building he hopes will one day be his workplace. In a TV drama of Tice's life, you could imagine him standing at this window staring broodily at the prize of Parliament every night as he sips from an impossibly large whisky. Tice's partner is the journalist Isabel Oakeshott (Tice is divorced after a 24-year marriage to his ex-wife Emma, with three adult children, while Oakeshott also has three children from a previous marriage) and he says of their relationship: "Politics for us, it's not a hobby, but it's like a hobby, it's a passion because we think we can shape and influence. And we also think that we're able to say and write things and speak for many millions of people who want someone to do that for them because they can't." Tice is the grandson of the property developer and one time Conservative parliamentary candidate Bernard Sunley, and is the third child of James Tice, a showjumper and specialist in equine muscle problems, and Joan, a horse trainer and philanthropist. He was educated at Uppingham School, which also produced Sir Malcolm Campbell, Rick Stein, Stephen Fry and Jonathan Agnew. His student days were spent at the University of Salford, where he studied construction economics and quantity surveying. It was, he says, "a rough place" in the 1980s where: "I learnt a lot away from the gilded, fortunate South East [of England] and that informed a huge amount of my sense that we could do so much better." He joined the family firm The Sunley Group - a housebuilding and commercial property business - in the 1990s and became its joint chief executive. Later, he ran the multinational property investment group CLS Holdings, before setting up his own firm, Quidnet Reit Ltd, which owns small warehouses and industrial units, and which "pays the bills", he says, along with a presenting slot on GB News. Having been a long-term Conservative Party member and donor, he co-founded the Leave.EU pressure group with businessman Arron Banks, briefly served as an MEP in the months before Britain left the EU, and joined Nigel Farage's Brexit Party as chairman in 2019. Two years later, after Farage had changed the name to Reform UK and stepped down as leader, Tice took over the reins, though Farage remains honorary president. Where Farage is the fag-in-mouth, pint-in-hand man of the people, Tice is more Milk Tray Man, a lover of dangerous sports who hurtled down the Cresta Run in his youth and knows how to fly a helicopter. Thanks to Tice's lifestyle choices he looks a decade or more younger than Farage, though they are in fact the same age. Polling shows that voters would be more likely to back Reform if Farage was still leader (he adds around three percentage points to Reform's vote share in polls when people are given the choice between him and the relatively unknown Tice). Isn't that bad news for Tice, I ask? "That's only if you assume it's all about me," he replies with a smile that seems honest enough. "I'm not focused on titles and it's not about me. The truth is it doesn't matter what title he has, Farage's name fills newspaper headlines and it fills column inches, and that is good news for us because a lot of people still haven't heard of Reform. "Alongside Boris he is the best known politician in this country - and he is a lot more trusted than Boris - so I would like him to get stuck in as much as he can." Earlier this month, Tice called a press conference to make a supposedly major announcement, only to leave the media somewhat underwhelmed when it turned out not to involve the triumphant return of Farage to front-line politics (instead it was to announce that Ben Habib, the former MEP, will stand in the upcoming Wellingborough by-election). Farage is still weighing up his options, and if he decided to return as leader of Reform then Tice would surely step aside (given that it's not about him). One thing Tice does not expect his friend to do is run for Parliament in the general election. "I think that is the least likely thing he will do," he says. "If he tries to campaign [nationally] and also stand somewhere, the danger is that you don't do either quite as well." Tice also points out that Farage "had hoped he would be done [with politics] by now", having done more than anyone to achieve Brexit, which he had assumed the Conservatives would make a success of. "This is not Plan A for him." It is, though, Plan A for Tice, whose life has been given new purpose by his leadership of Reform. "This is not a one election project," he says energetically. "It's not a flash in the pan, one election and we're out of here. If you want to really leave a seismic game-changing legacy then not unreasonably that should take a bit of time. "This is a medium term mission. We can turn this ship around but it requires new, fresh, brave leadership that is just going to tell it as it is." Fresh, brave leadership in the form of prime minister Richard Tice? "Who knows," he says. "We're realists. The two-party system doesn't work for new, growing, disruptive parties. Reform could be the biggest party in the House of Commons with proportional representation, no question at all. "I'm very optimistic that it will change. If we ended up with a situation, which is eminently possible I'm afraid to say, where we got five or six million votes, four times more votes than the SNP, and they got 30 to 40 MPs and we got between nought and two, that's not a democracy, that's a Horlicks. People will say enough is enough, we're done with the two party system. I think we are facing a tipping point." He adds that he thinks this will happen in the next electoral cycle. It is certainly true that if Labour fails to win an overall majority, the Lib Dems would expect a shift to PR as the price of going into coalition, meaning the idea is not entirely pie in the sky. There is, though, a danger that Sir Keir Starmer is more likely to win a thumping majority (and keep the two party system) if Reform peels off Conservative voters in numbers. What does Tice say to those on the Right who think it would be better for his party to bow out and give the Tories a clear run? "Well, we took that approach in 2019 [when the Brexit Party did not field candidates in the 317 seats won by the Tories in 2017] and we were betrayed, and we're not going to be betrayed again. We're done with that. "The Tories should stand aside for Reform UK! Before the election that is going to become a live debate, when we're polling significantly higher than we are now and the Tory polls are heading south. "There's no economic growth. The boats will keep coming. Lawful immigration continues to be wildly out of control. Their poll rating is going to slip. Morally, frankly, they should stand aside. If it was head to head between me and Keir Starmer, a two horse race, I'd beat him every week. I absolutely believe that without question." This may be down to that unshakeable self-belief rather than hard evidence, but there is no doubt that Reform's policies hold strong appeal to some 2019 Conservative voters, particularly in former Red Wall seats, who trusted the Tories to get a grip on immigration only to see net migration leap to a record high of 745,000. David Cameron was forced to promise the EU referendum to see off the threat of Ukip, which ultimately cost him his job. With a crucial vote on the Rwanda plan coming up this week, will Rishi Sunak face a similar fate if he ignores the support building for Reform UK's agenda? "You have got a city the size of Birmingham in terms of net migration in 2022," Tice says. "No one voted for that." Tice's immigration plan is to get migration down to net zero with a one in, one out policy. "About 450,000 people emigrate every year so you can have smart immigration to the same number each year," he says. "High-skilled, above the average national salary, that adds value. If that creates a labour shortage, good. That will either force wages to go up for British workers on low pay, or businesses investing capital in equipment to replace the labour. That's how the combine harvester was invented." This is one part of a four-part plan to save Britain, as he puts it. Point two is making work pay by increasing the tax-free allowance from £12,570 to £20,000. "That's an extra £30 a week net in everybody's pay packet… that's a real motivator for people on low incomes and will help get half a million people off benefits back into work." His third idea is to make every government department cut its budget, by applying a private sector mindset to the public sector. "You've got to relook at everything, right down to the last tack. You're going to save that money and if you don't save that money, you're fired. It's what you do in business." Lastly, he would scrap net zero, "the greatest act of self-harm ever imposed on the British people by Westminster." In the past, Reform and its predecessor the Brexit Party has been seen as a one man party (that man being Farage) unable to put up parliamentary candidates of any substance, but Tice insists his party has grown up. It will field 630 candidates in the general election, compared with the Brexit Party's 277 in 2019, and has already approved and vetted 450 of them. Tice admits that with so many candidates "you will always have some muppet that says something, tweets something daft" but he is adamant the vetting process has improved and his candidates are of a high calibre. Tice himself will be standing in Hartlepool, the seat where he came third with a 25.8 per cent vote share in 2019. Money, though, is a problem. Tice is not wealthy enough to fund Reform UK himself, and it relies largely on membership fees, donations from members and the odd six-figure donation from a wealthy backer such as Terence Mordaunt, chairman of the Bristol Port Company and a director of the anti net zero group the Global Warming Policy Foundation, who gave £100,000. Financial constraints are part of the reason Tice arranges interviews in his apartment building: Reform does not have a London office, partly to save money, and partly because having its headquarters in the Midlands adds to its "people's party" credentials. Tice believes Britain needs saving both financially and culturally, and says his party is attracting "a good chunk of voters from the dissatisfied left, the traditional working class families in the Red Wall seats, coastal seats, who believe in hard work, believe in Britain, and they don't want our culture to change". Tice does not mince his words when it comes to the sticky subject of multiculturalism. "Multiculturalism doesn't work. We know it doesn't work but most people aren't brave enough to say it. "People live in their different cultures in their own silos, not learning the language, not appreciating our law…we are seeing parts of the country where people are saying this is our community, this is our culture, we'd like to operate under Sharia law, and the answer to that is no. "People have got two choices - they either agree to it and buy into our way or they are happy to go and enjoy living in other countries where they might enjoy practising Sharia law. And no one's really brave enough to tell it as it is, that's what we're now facing. Someone's got to start this debate, because that's not what the British people want… what you want is a multi-ethnic society that buys into a single British culture. And that British culture is our heritage, our history, where we've come from, why we're so respected around the world, our language, our legal system, that sense of respect, of tolerance, of compassion, a general sense of fair play." Tice refers to a letter he recently received from the NHS that was translated into 27 different languages. "That is an absurd state of play to be in. It's a complete failure of common sense, of leadership. If you want healthcare, learn the lingo, or pay for it privately. Very simple. And I reckon a vast majority of people would agree with me." He also thinks a vast majority of people agree with his stance on transgender rights. "We're very clear that, under the age of 18, there should be no transitioning allowed to be engaged with in schools. What's going on at the moment is nothing short of dangerous. I have been a governor for a number of schools and it's the greatest breach of safeguarding that I've seen. "We would write to every head teacher and say this is banned under the age of 18. We're not having different pronouns, we're not having social transitioning, we're not having gender questioning, and if you do it, you're fired. What's going on at the moment is exactly the opposite of what the vast majority of parents want. I know I'm right on this." The election will decide. 'You had a city the size of Birmingham in net migration in www.2022.No one voted for that' 'We're done with the two-party system. I think we are facing a tipping point' Load-Date: January 14, 2024  End of Document
