   'My chin dropped to the floor. My wife voted Leave' i-news July 28, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 37 Length: 667 words Body   Seven years since the Brexit vote on 23 June 2016, the Rejoin EU Movement is still fighting for a second referendum, with an upcoming protest planned for September. Ian, 49, has always been a passionate Remainer. His wife told him that she felt the same. Here, he shares how the referendum was the beginning of the end of their marriage. Imet my ex-wife in the early 2000s. We got married in 2007 and our son came along not long after. Throughout our marriage, my wife would occasionally post political jokes on Facebook, but she had never been overly vocal about politics. In terms of political beliefs, we agreed. Or so I thought. I was a maths teacher under the Tony Blair government, but as soon as the Tories got into power, I had to leave. I disagreed with the educational system they wanted to introduce and I decided it was better for me to change careers and become an engineer. My wife understood that and saw how angry I was at the government. For a considerable period of time, I thought she agreed with me that nobody who had children should ever vote Conservative. Indeed, I love my kids with all my heart, but if they ever voted Conservative, I would never speak to them again. I have told them that. They think I'm joking, but this is serious. Then the Brexit vote came in 2016. My wife's parents had always been quite right-wing, but I had always been thankful that my wife had never shared their views. When the Brexit campaigning began, my wife's mum had told me she was thinking of voting Leave, and I had tried to convince her out of it. We made the mistake of visiting them the night before the Brexit vote was announced. That evening, her mum said she had voted for Brexit. The next morning, we woke up at their house and the UK had voted to leave the EU. I was furious. I couldn't even look her parents in the eye. How could you vote away the freedom of movement? The opportunity for your grandchildren to work in 20 different countries? My wife gave me no signal that she disagreed with my anger. I became quite depressed over Brexit. After that, we started having marriage problems. I think I probably switched off and became a bit unresponsive. I have bad PTSD from it all. It was an awful time, I was almost suicidal, so I can't really remember how it eventually came out. But once the dust had settled on the Brexit vote, my wife confessed. She told me that she had voted to Leave and she had also voted Conservative. My chin dropped to the floor. She saw me leave teaching because of the education system the Tories were introducing. She knew how much I disapproved of it. She had seen me go on strike. We had two kids. I believed the young people would be shafted thanks to Brexit. She knew that. I realised I hadn't known her at all. This was a different person. Soon enough, she met another man. I am sure she would probably have a different story to tell about how our marriage ended, but eight months after the Brexit vote, we started our divorce proceedings. Perhaps I was so vocal about my disapproval of Brexit that she felt she couldn't share her views. Looking back, our marriage wasn't a happy one. We didn't know each other well enough, which was probably a lot of where the unhappiness came from. We were probably too polarised on lots of things, not just politics. However, I have come out as a better person. I'm kinder and more grounded, but I'm still convinced to this day that she voted wrongly. That vote has left a scar, but I have no regrets about how it played out in my marriage. I regret marrying that person, although I've got two beautiful kids who I love very much. I have a German partner now. When we go on holiday, she goes through the EU passport control section at the airport, and I have to go through a separate section. My partner finds it a bit upsetting. It makes me feel as if we're different when we aren't. It's a horrible thing. As told to Eleanor Peake We didn't know each other well enough, which was probably a lot of where the unhappiness came from Load-Date: July 28, 2023  End of Document
