   'Pragmatic approach of Collins is required to face Brexit challenges' - Gorman Irish Independent August 21, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 522 words Byline: RALPH RIEGEL Body   Ireland must follow the lifelong pragmatism of Michael Collins and adapt to the challenges now posed by Brexit to both Northern Ireland and Anglo-Irish relations. The plea came as former RTÉ broadcaster and author Tommie Gorman delivered the keynote address at Béal na Bláth to mark the 101st anniversary of the death of the IRA commander and Ireland's first finance minister. A broadcaster with RTÉ for over 40 years, Mr Gorman reported on some of Ireland's most significant political developments, both in relation to the Northern Ireland peace process and the European Union. Yesterday's event marked 101 years since the death of the IRA leader and the military strategist later regarded by Britain as one of its most dangerous foes. Collins was shot and killed in an ambush at Béal na Bláth on August 22, 1922, as he returned to Cork city having completed an inspection tour of west Cork at the height of the Civil War. He served as Ireland's finance minister from April 2, 1919, until his death at age 31, and his achievements in putting the fledgling State on a solid financial footing are ranked alongside his remarkable abilities as the IRA's military commander during the War of Independence. A survey by the British Army Museum ranked Collins as one of the most dangerous enemies Britain faced over the past 300 years. Mr Gorman said the 1998 Good Friday Agreement was critically enabled by both Ireland and the UK being part of the EU. "Opinion polls consistently indicate we are a pro-EU country," he told the large crowd. "Our views (on Europe) were influenced by our knowledge of our circum- stances before we joined and what has happened to us since. "Britain's history before EC membership in 1973 and its story since differs from ours. "There was a straw in the wind on January 1, 1999. We met the criteria for membership of the EU's Single Currency and we joined the eurozone. "The UK opted to keep its pound and remain outside." Mr Gorman said it was clear there were numerous driving forces behind Brexit. "The Brexit debate reflected Britain's discontent about its changing status and circumstances. And frustration with its ability to alter it. "As a sovereign nation, it exercised its right to put the issue to the people. Britain is adjusting to the consequences of Brexit as it begins a new phase outside the European Union and pursues a different relationship with it. "We too are adapting to the circumstances where the neighbouring island is no longer in the EU. "It presents very practical challenges. But our status as an English-speaking country, with guaranteed access to EU markets, now has enhanced weight when seeking foreign direct investment. "The Brexit decision has been made and the challenge now is to deal with the consequences." Mr Gorman said modern politicians should remember the outlook of Collins. "Michael Collins was a pragmatist. In conflict he had a ruthless streak to match his adversaries. He was among those who negotiated and then championed the Treaty, knowing it might cost him his life." He added: "On this island we have new challenges and our collective energy is required to deal with them." Graphic    Former RTÉ broadcaster and author Tommie Gorman delivered the keynote address at Béal na Bláth to mark 101 years since the death of Michael Collins. Photo: Brian Lougheed Load-Date: August 21, 2023  End of Document
