   'Red Wall' voters signal desire for closer ties to EU i-news October 7, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 394 words Byline: Hugo Gye Body   Voters in the "Red Wall" have turned against Brexit and back closer ties with the EU, Sir Keir Starmer has been warned, as members fight to put the issue on the agenda at Labour's annual conference. Anti-Brexit campaigners have tabled a motion calling for Labour to commit to a closer relationship with Brussels if it wins the next election. Sir Keir is understood to oppose the efforts and Labour to Win, a group close to the leadership, has recommended against bringing the motion to a vote. Labour bosses have sought to downplay the issue, apparently fearing that Leave voters who backed the Conservatives in 2019 will be reluctant to return to the party if it is seen as pro-EU. But a survey by Deltapoll of the 45 "Red Wall" constituencies that the Tories took from Labour at the last election suggests that voters in these areas now believe that Brexit has harmed the UK. Sixty-three per cent of those polled said that leaving the EU has damaged Britons' living standards and 59 per cent said Brexit is primarily or partly responsible for the UK's high inflation rate. Asked what the UK's policy towards EU citizens who want to migrate to Britain should be, 13 per cent said they should be able to come without restrictions and 40 per cent said they should be allowed to come if they have a job offer - suggesting that a majority back some form of return to free movement. Only 6 per cent agreed that immigration has been better controlled since Brexit, while 53 per cent told Deltapoll that they thought Britain's economy had suffered. Stella Creasy, the Labour MP for Walthamstow who commissioned the poll, told i: "This research shows that the Red Wall is fed up with Brexit and the damage it's doing to their lives. "It's especially startling to see that many of those who voted Tory but who are thinking of voting Labour at the next election not only blame Brexit for increasing prices, but also messing up immigration and our economy and see rebuilding trade with Europe as a priority "Showing how we can work with Europe to save the jobs and trade lost to Brexit could cement their vote for Labour." The motion was drafted by the Labour Movement for Europe and has been tabled by 30 local constituency parties for discussion at the conference, which opens tomorrow. Sir Keir has said that he wants to negotiate a series of agreements with the EU to make trade easier. Load-Date: October 7, 2023  End of Document
