   'Stupid' post-Brexit rules have made life much harder, say British expats i-news August 9, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 23 Length: 442 words Byline: Claire Gilbody-Dickerson Body   A retired British couple living in France said post-Brexit rule changes have made travel a "hassle" and led to them seeing their children and grandchildren less. Owen and Beverly Leeds, both 66, told i that getting their favourite British foods such as bacon and Cheddar cheese had also become an expensive quest because meat and dairy products cannot be brought into the EU from a non-EU country. Euro The couple, from Northumberland, used to ask friends and family to bring items when they visited. Now they have to order them from Ireland, and the minimum spend is Euro 100 (£82), with 2.5kg of bacon costing Euro 39 and 800g of Cheddar costing Euro 14.95. Amount that citizens prove during in They have been living in southern Burgundy permanently since 2018, after buying a twobedroom house for about £100,000 in 2015. But like other expats, they have found that post-Brexit travel rules are making life much harder. Ms Leeds, a former lecturer, said travel rules were now so complicated that they do not visit the UK to see their three children and two grandchildren as often as they used to. Her children also visit France less frequently because of complex requirements for non-EU citizens that include proving they have Euro 120 (£103) a day for their stay or having a "welcome letter" from a host; having proof of travel insurance that includes health and repatriation (not just an EHIC or GHIC); and having a return ticket. Britons without EU residency must have their passports stamped so authorities can check they are not overstaying the 90- day visa-free period over 180 days. 120 per day non-EU have to have their stay FRANCE The couple have had to repeatedly tell border guards not to stamp their passports because they have free movement as French residents. "I think Brexit was one of the most stupid and irrational things that the UK has ever done to itself - and that any country has ever done to itself," Ms Leeds said. The couple have also encountered issues getting food sent from the UK. Ms Leeds, who has coeliac disease, said she used to get gluten-free flour from Britain because such products are "really expensive" in France. Since the company she previously used stopped shipping when paperwork became "too complicated" after Brexit, Ms Leeds pays Euro 8 per kilo for gluten-free flour in France. The couple said they now combine orders with other Britons in their area to share the goods and cost. Ms Leeds acknowledged "it would never be the same again", adding: "Brexit has caused that and I blame the people who lied [about its benefits]." Euro 120 Amount per day that non-EU citizens have to prove they have during their stay in France Load-Date: August 8, 2023  End of Document
