   'Tories must talk up the benefits of Brexit or lose the next election'; PATH TO VICTORY: Lord Frost Top Brussels negotiator calls for 'spirit of change' to excite voters Sunday Express July 30, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 5 Length: 541 words Byline: David Williamson Body   BRITAIN'S chief Brexit negotiator has warned the Conservatives must defend the decision to leave the EU or face punishment at the ballot box. Lord Frost, a former special adviser to Boris Johnson, has set out a path for the Tories to hold on to power in the election expected next year. The Conservative peer wants the party to go into the election offering the same "spirit of change" that excited voters in the run-up to the 2016 Brexit referendum. He warns if voters are convinced "Brexit is failing" they will turn away from the party. The peer also argues a "rethink" is needed about how the UK will hit its target of achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050, saying it is time to "get serious". He cautions against forcing expensive lifestyle changes on voters or requiring them to use green technologies that are not yet ready. Lord Frost's intervention comes after the Conservatives have trailed Labour in the polls since the end of 2021 and there is evidence many voters doubt whether the country made the right choice to quit the EU. The most recent polling by Omnisis shows 62 per cent of people think that "in hindsight" it was wrong to leave. Thirty-eight per cent said if the election was held tomorrow they would back Labour, with just one in five supporting the Tories. Rishi Sunak's party was this month shaken by the loss of two once-safe seats to Labour and the Liberal Democrats in by-elections. Lord Frost argues that "60,000 of our voters went walkabout" because the party is not offering "that real Conservative agenda" that will galvanise the grassroots. He told a Tory rally in Newcastle yesterday that the party needed to "talk about Brexit more" and defend the nation's historic decision. He warned: "Voters rightly see leaving the European Union as a Conservative party project. "If we don't talk up the successes and the future prospects, no one else will. "If voters come to believe that 'Brexit is failing', it is this Government that will pay the price. Defending Brexit can't be left to a few people on Twitter. "So we need to get serious about communicating what we have achieved, what we are achieving, and what can still be achieved, by bringing power home to the British people - making us a full democracy again and putting voters back in charge." Setting out the scale of the challenge, he said "we can all see what's wrong with the country" but "it is us that have been in power for 13 years" and the Conservatives "bear responsibility". He said Labour will argue it is "time for a change" but the Tories should also use this slogan and promise policies that are "genuinely going to make this country different". Lord Frost pushed for the 2030 deadline to ban the sale of new petrol and diesel cars to be ditched, saying: "We didn't leave the EU only to impose even more damaging rules on ourselves. It has to go - the sooner the better." Lord Frost considers this issue a "big test". He argues that Labour considers green economics a pathway towards a "socialist utopia" and is prepared to "destroy the UK oil and gas industry on the way". He set out clear dividing lines between the two parties, painting Labour as "the political party for busybodying social workers, woke university lecturers and know-it-all HR directors". Load-Date: October 27, 2023  End of Document
