   'Why don't we see more people from south county Dublin starting businesses? Why are most started by boys and girls from the country?'; Donegal man Cathal Friel, who is doing his fifth IPO through UK brokers, says Irish financiers are missing a trick Irish Independent January 4, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS WEEK;NEWS; Pg. 4,5 Length: 1806 words Byline: CATHAL FRIEL Body   t the age of 16, Cathal Friel got three things from his father - control A of a struggling family business, a deep dislike of debt, and a share-trading account. They became the building blocks of his life. "My father had a Ford franchise for north Donegal from the 1950s onwards," Friel explains. "He borrowed a load of money in 1978-79 - and then interest rates hit the roof, the Irish economy had a bad spell, and he got ill with a heart problem. "So I had to leave school after the Inter Cert to run the business. With hindsight it worked out great, but at the time [1981] it was pretty shit." Friel was a middle child in a family of 10, and he says none of them ever had much time for debt after that. A personal "hatred" of mortgages led him to rent until he was 40, and to buy old cars for cash - he finally splashed out on a new one in 2021 to mark 40 years in business. He believes this dislike of debt is shared by many "country folk" and, just like Denis O'Brien, openly admits to favouring culchies as employees. Fortunately, residence in south Dublin is not one of the nine grounds on which discrimination is outlawed by the Employment Equality Act. "Why don't people in south county Dublin start more businesses? Why are most of them started by boys and girls from the country?" Friel muses. "We tend to hire country folk, or northsiders - because southside Dubliners are too comfy, too obsessed with having a four-wheel drive and the big red-brick house." Southsiders may earn big salaries, but they'll take on a car loan, a substantial mortgage, put their children in private schools, and at the end of the year they've no cash; it's all spent. "So that's why the vast majority of new business ventures are set up by country folk, who tend to be a bit wary of debt," Friel reasons. "They like to build up a nest egg to use for the rainy day, which means you can take six or nine months without a salary while you start a business." Friel's aversion to debt dictates his corporate philosophy, but let's first go back to that share-trading account he got at the age of 16. While running the family business, "with any spare cash I bought shares in small-cap companies", he recalls. One of those investments was in the Kingspan IPO of 1989. The value of those shares has since increased 50-fold. "I put IR£14,000 into that IPO - I still have a picture of the share cert I got from Riada Stockbrokers. "I've taken out about 20 or 30 times that over the years - and I still have about (EURO)50,000 left in it. Every time the share price doubles or trebles, I sell some. "I always say you should never be greedy - if the price of a smallcap company doubles, sell half your stock, and try a few more." Friel doesn't just invest in IPOs, he launches them. Successfully. To date he has done four - Fastnet Oil and Gas in 2012, Amryt Pharma in 2016, Open Orphan (now hVIVO) in 2019, and Poolbeg Pharma two years ago. He loves that model - scaling up a company by going public as an alternative to taking on bank debt, private investors or venture capital. Then, expand by buying low-cost or distressed assets. Make acquisitions by issuing shares, paying with paper rather than cash. "We grew Amryt from a market cap of (EURO)29m to (EURO)1.5bn by doing five acquisitions, for which we paid paper," Friel says. "We grew Open Orphan from (EURO)7m, making two acquisitions, and didn't pay a penny. Paper." Amryt Pharma, which developed treatments for patients with rare or neglected (orphan) diseases, was bought for about $1.48bn last spring by Chiesi Farmaceutici, a pharmaceutical company based in Parma. It was "almost a Kingspan", says Friel, though he points out that Amryt had a rocky couple of years after its IPO, with the share price dropping 50pc. After being listed on the Nasdaq, "it took off like a rocket". Now he wants to repeat the trick with Poolbeg Pharma, an infectious-diseases firm spun out of Open Orphan, which had its IPO on the London AIM stock exchange in July 2021. Three former Amryt executives - Laura Maher, David Allmond and John McEvoy - joined Poolbeg last year. Friel says it's like getting the band back together - though Amryt's vocalist and lead guitarist won't be joining the reunion. "The CEO [Joseph Wiley] and CFO [Rory Nealon] of that company made so much money they're gone to the sun," laughs Friel. "The big thing is to find good CEOs and CFOs. "That CEO had been out of a job for nine months. He had to empty his Davy Stockbroking account in order to put (EURO)100,000 into Amryt. Then he walked away with (EURO)35m cash six years later. "His CFO, we got (EURO)50,000 out of him. When you get a job like that, you have to write a cheque. The CFO walked away with (EURO)25m. You could never do that in private equity in seven years, plus get a bloody big salary." But why isn't Friel joining them in the sun, instead of striving to create another $1bn market-cap company? "I didn't take (EURO)35m off the table," he says of the Amryt sale. "I got a good few million, but not double digits. Ultimately I am not motivated by money. I have no intention of ever retiring. I might slow down to four days a week when I reach 65. It's not killer work, it's fun work." Friel's enthusiasm for small-cap IPOs is not shared by Dublin's stockbroking fraternity, which is why he and his small team go to London. "For 15 years we've tried to encourage Davy and Goodbody to support our public companies, and they say: 'No way, too small.' When we go to London, there's an open door to all the brokers. Amryt and Open Orphan made a lot of money in London, so when we go with Poolbeg, it's easy." The Donegal man blames consolidation in the Irish stockbroking sector, with smaller outfits such as Campbell O'Connor and Merrion, where he once worked, shuttered or taken over. "I think it's economics. Davy has 800 staff, Goodbody about 300, so they need huge fee incomes to feed the monsters they have built. "Only two brokers in Dublin are allowed to do IPOs. In London there's probably about 100, and the vast majority are a fraction of the size of Davy and Goodbody." He reckons the Irish economy is missing a trick by not doing up to 15 small-cap IPOs a year. Where are the Ryanairs and CRHs of the future to come from? "When I invested in the Kingspan IPO, that company was even smaller than Poolbeg Pharma is today. Now it's a (EURO)25bn company, and the brokers are saying: 'Oh woe, its listing is moving out of the country.'" There's a crisis in Irish stockbroking, he points out, with a significant number of jobs being lost and the two main firms pivoting towards wealth management. "It's my belief that in six or 12 months' time, their stockbroking arms will have shrunk so small that suddenly an IPO from Cathal Friel might be interesting." Meanwhile there is a latent demand among established Irish companies to do IPOs in order to make acquisitions without taking on debt. Friel says he regularly gets phone calls from family patriarchs (and one "household name" matriarch) who say they want to "do a Kingspan, or do a Fyffes", and who contacted Irish brokers - only to be advised to do a trade sale instead. He admits that care is needed when investing in small-cap IPOs; they're not for widows and orphans. "They are for those with a good pension, plenty of cash, mortgage under control, some money in big PLCs and in property, and who have a small bit for this more exciting trading when they want to get 4x or 5x. "The brokers' view may be that there is not much of that high-networth money in Ireland. I think we probably have the biggest pot of HNW money of anywhere [in Europe]". Friel says he's on an Entrepreneur of the Year WhatsApp group with about 500 people, over half of whom sold their businesses and have "tons" of cash. They will all have another opportunity when Friel brings his fifth IPO - of European Green Metals - to the London market in April. The formula is the same. "We found an amazing CEO, Aiden Lavelle, in Westport of all places, and our CFO, Jack Kelly, who is ex-PWC, has done 18-hour days." The company is looking for deposits of rare metals such as lithium - they've already found a big deposit in Sweden - and assess their size by drilling. "But we will never bring them out of the ground," Friel explains. "The minute you start taking material out of the ground, you're in big doo-doo. The IPO will pay for drilling. The market cap will be small - (EURO)20m on day one. We will raise (EURO)10m and then, as a small public company, European Green can bolt on more assets. We're already talking to Norwegian companies. Instead of paying cash, we will give them shares." Friel is a glass-half-full man, seeing silver linings around the darkest clouds. The war in Ukraine has prompted Europe to switch from fossil fuels to solar and wind, and once the conflict is over, rebuilding that shattered country will be great for business - a "Marshall Plan on steroids". Brexit? The makings of Ireland. Before it, many of our FDI jobs, particularly Apple's, were moving to the UK, Friel reckons. Now we're luring business away from Britain. "Brexit means Barclays moved half their bond team here - highly paid jobs," he says. Friel's small outfit rents office space in Fitzwilliam Hall on Leeson Street, and across the corridor is McGill & Partners, an insurance company, which moved to Dublin after Brexit and created 40 jobs "This building alone has about 200 Brexit jobs. Before it, we were getting zero investment from China. Now there's a ton of Chinese money, including Wuxi putting two pharmaceutical manufacturing plants in Dundalk. Brexit has ensured the Irish economy will be stable for the next 15 years." He's sanguine about the prospect of Sinn Féin being in charge for some or all of those 15 years. Friel has extensive contacts in Northern Ireland, and they tell him there is nothing to fear from the party. "Even DUP people say 'Sinn Féin are very pro-business. When we have a problem, it's not Sammy but Seamus we go to. We go to the local Sinn Fein councillor or MLA'. I think in the south they will probably surprise us." Q&A Name: Cathal Friel Age: 59 Lives in: Monkstown, Co Dublin Family: Married to Pamela, the couple has two sons and a daughter Education: Inter Cert, and did an MBA at University of Ulster as a mature student Favourite hobby: "Spending time with our three kids." Favourite book: For Blood and Money: Billionaires, Biotech and the Quest for a Blockbuster Drug by Nathan Vardi Favourite movie: The Shawshank Redemption Favourite podcast: Magnified with Matt Cooper Best piece of business advice: The harder you work, the luckier you get "Even DUP people say Sinn Féin are very pro-business. When we have a problem, it's not Sammy we go to, but Seamus" "I always say you should never be greedy - if the price of a small-cap company doubles, sell half your stock, and try a few more" Graphic    Cathal Friel believes in a year's time, Dublin's stockbroking sector will be so small they'll finally be happy to hear from him. Photo: Gerry Mooney Load-Date: January 4, 2024  End of Document
