   400,000 French make London their home and feel at home despite Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English September 20, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 827 words Body   The Louvre is the heart of the 1st arrondissement of Paris; the fourth is the Marais, the fifth the Latin Quarter and the sixth covers Saint Germain-des-Près; the seventh is dominated by the Eiffel Tower, the eighth revolves around the Champs Elysées, the ninth has the Opéra, and the eighteenth the ups and downs of Montmartre? The XXIer and XIIème are a little further away, and to reach them you have to cross the English Channel by ferry, by boat or on the Eurostar. Three hundred thousand French are registered as residents in London at their consulate, but it is estimated that there are at least another hundred thousand who have not bothered to do the paperwork, a figure confirmed by applications for permanent residence to the Home Office after Brexit. Some left with the pandemic and have not returned, others were bankers who have gone with the music to Dublin, Frankfurt or Milan, there are fewer students serving beers and coffees because of the visa hurdles after the British exit from the European Union, and in restaurants it gives the impression that the waiters are Poles or Romanians who, with their facility for languages, imitate Molière's accent reasonably well for a living. The English admire the warrior spirit of the French, while they just stand in line. After Brexit, nothing is the same. France and Great Britain are like those couples who get divorced, throw the trash at each other's heads, one accuses the other of cheating on them, divide the children, the furniture and even the old vinyl records, negotiate the payment of the pension, and after the trauma of it all try to get along reasonably well, as friends.... But politically it's not easy. Perhaps it will change with Starmer. For French Londoners - many of them highly paid, City speculators, fund managers, diplomats, university and Lycée professors - it is no drama either. While Britons with a second residence in France, according to EU laws, can only stay in the country for a maximum of ninety days every six months, for European citizens who were already here before Brexit, life goes on and their rights are the same as before the breakup. When they renew their passport, they have to inform the Home Office electronically (a one-minute procedure), and enjoy, it's two days. The XXIer Arrondissement, the neighborhood of South Kesington, has as its epicenter the Lycée Charles de Gaulle, the French Institute and the Lumière cinema (which combines Gallic films with the latest blockbusters). And around it, as satellites, there is a bookstore that shows through the window the works of Racine, Rousseau, Camus and Voltaire, bakeries and bistrots that are not exactly like the Aux Deux Magots but make an effort to approach. Even the flower stall in front of the metro station is reminiscent of those on the Grands Boulevards. It is one of the most luxurious neighborhoods of the English capital, available only to the most privileged. That is why the last couple of years have seen the emergence of the XXIIème Arrondissement in Kentish Town, a more discreet, middle-class neighborhood in northwest London, with more affordable rents, where the Lycée Français has set up a branch in an old Victorian building reminiscent of Harry Potter, in response to the increasing demand for school places from the expatriate community. Gradually, among the Indian restaurants, boulangeries have appeared from which emanates the wonderful smell of croissants fresh from the oven. And Uber drivers are much nicer (although there are exceptions) than Paris cab drivers! French and English have since ancient times a relationship of love and hate, admiration and suspicion, healthy and unhealthy envy, rivalry and cooperation, a consequence of the countless religious wars and wars of succession in which the two countries have been confronted, of the ambitions and colonial conquests of one and the other. De Gaulle prevented the entry of the United Kingdom into the EEC, and London has left the EU slamming the door, but this does not prevent this side of the Channel from admiring (from the left) the Gallic revolutionary spirit, the trade union strength (which Thatcher killed here) and the ability to mobilize, take to the streets and burn containers (however uncivic it may be), while the British limit themselves to queuing, so formal, swallowing whatever is necessary. Not to mention the cheeses, the cuisine in general and life in Provence, which cannot be compared. Mon Dieu! It has not all been wars, however, and not everything is the Brexit disagreement, the differences between Blair and Chirac, or between the malospelos Johnson and Macron. With economies and armies of similar size, they are natural rivals but they have also been together in the fight against Hitler and the Suez disaster, and Churchill even proposed to unite the two countries. The idea did not take off, but in London there are two neighborhoods of Paris, and Kentish Town is the 22ème Arrondissement. Load-Date: September 21, 2023  End of Document
