   58% of Britons support EU membership seven years after Brexit win CE Noticias Financieras English June 23, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 361 words Body   Support for the UK's membership of the EU is the highest since the Brexit vote, according to a YouGov poll. 58% of Britons want to return to the European Union today, compared to 42% who still support leaving. The current "bump" of 16 points was exceeded even in February, when "remain" reached the 60% mark. Exactly seven years ago, Britons voted for Brexit by a scant four points (52% to 48%). Despite the general perception that leaving the EU has had a negative economic impact and contributed to a worsening cost-of-living crisis, both Rishi Sunak 's Conservative Party and Keir Starmer 's Labour Party now believe that there is no going back and that the challenge is to make Brexit "work". In another surprising poll, sponsored by UK in a Changing Europe, only 18% of Britons who voted in favor believe at this point that Brexit can be considered "a success." Thirty percent believe it has gone "neither well nor badly" and 26% believe it is still "too early to tell". "There is a widespread belief that the Brexit has been badly managed," asserts Anand Menon, director of UK in a Changing Europe. "And that has fueled voter misgivings. The Brexit has arguably eroded trust in politicians." The YouGov poll also reveals a marked decline in support in other European countries for following the UK's lead. Remaining in the EU in a hypothetical referendum would reach 62% in France and 62% in Italy, two of the countries with the highest proportion of Euroskeptics. In Spain, support for remaining even reaches 87%, compared to 79% in Denmark, 70% in Sweden and 69% in Germany. The war in Ukraine has been a key factor in the upturn in pro-European sentiment, although the survey also detects a fatigue in the background and a gradual return to pre-conflict levels. Given what has happened to their country, a slim majority of Britons (42% vs. 40%) consider it "unlikely" that other countries will follow suit. And despite the pro-European desire of the majority, 51% also acknowledge that the UK is "unlikely" to return to the EU. The fatalistic view of the European Union from the islands has on the other hand given way to "optimism" (41% vs. 36%) about its future. Load-Date: June 24, 2023  End of Document
