   `Rejoin the EU? It won't exist in five years' Daily Star September 21, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: FEATURES; Pg. 20 Length: 604 words Body   Labour, your away with the fairies, your unelectable, you have no policies & cannot agree on what you want to acheive, join lettuce liz truss in an iceberg vegetable garden, stay ot of eu thier on the verge of collapse, it will not exist in 5 yrs. Anona -a mouse If Starmer rejoins us back in the EU as an associate member it will be a massive betrayal of our democracy. Our EU friends just want to punish us for having the audacity to leave. The whole point of leaving was to make our own laws and tackle immigration. We can't even do that without them interfering with the human rights bandwagon. Every suggestion is shot down and we are told it is illegal. This once great Country is going down the pan. Cumbrian Kev Dave Pinfold: far from being protected Brexit needs to be revoked? The utter stupidity of some people never ceases to astound me. Alan Quay As I walk the valley shadow could I remind you can't Google Bolt? dave pinfold: maybe you can tell me in what way the common man has benefited from brexit, the only thing you hear from brexiteers is migrants nothing else seems to matter. rj Talk about a Dip Stick, Labour leader Kier Starmer goes to France to cosy up to Macron regarding renegotiating a EU deal. I bet Macron thought here comes another British possible IDIOTIC PM who wants to give us something. Doesn't Starmer realise Macron has RIPPED Britain off for million's of pounds to do BUGGER all regarding the ILLEGALLS he keeps sending us across the Channel. You will cost Labour thousands of votes Starmer just like when Labour tried to overturn the Democratic EU referendum result, short memory Keir Starmer. TOD Dave Pinfold - Brexit would Not be Safe with Labour - Well thank GOD for that. WHICH part of the Brexit 'Experiment' are YOU keen to retain then? Den BREXIT is a thread running through all our problems. Trade suffering contributes to INFLATION and labor shortages. New nurses arriving from the EU slowed to nearly zero. We are 50000 short. Between 2019 and 2023 food rose by 25%. After Brexit 330000 workers left Britain and by Sept 2022 there was a shortfall of 440000 workers. 4000 doctors left after brexit. Its weighing on imports and exports. In June 60% said they'd vote to rejoin as we are 5.5% poorer 60% say it was a wrong decision Brexit isn't working / the elephant in the room not talked about anymore. Brian Linford Pontefract So food prices slowing down, really?? Price rises of 10p+ here & there soon add up. ANGST I don't think the doctors and nurses who strike actually realise how many people are genuinely in pain and suffering, and even at risk of losing their lives from the massive back log of operations. Dave Cornwall I'm embarrassed to say that I ever worked for the NHS when doctors and consultants are striking. Consultants top their pay up doing private work none of them are on the breadline. They knew what the wages would be with NHS if your so flipping hard done by get another job. Ollies mum Rishi Sunak is planning to water down the UK's green targets. The reckless drive towards Net Zero will hit low-income people the hardest, as they will not be able to afford the changes required, such as switching to electric cars and heat pumps. There should be a referendum on Net Zero, but after the way the EU referendum went, I'm not holding my breath! Dave Pinfold, Stockport For f***s sake can we get real, we are either born male or female, there is no in between. Why the hell are we playing with nature? This will end in tears! Downey Frett My school was so rough that the kids liked being taught in portacabins because they were easier to vandalise! CHARLTON GARRY Graphic    ? Could we have a pic of super model Cindy Craword? Big Joe, Glasgow Load-Date: September 21, 2023  End of Document
