   Agreeing to disagree; Letters East Anglian Daily Times November 14, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 30 Length: 314 words Body   OH DEAR, it appears that once again I've upset 'Aghast' (my critic Audrey Naylor) who felt the need to write in to respond to my letter of reply to John Baily (Sept 22). Sorry Audrey. It will never fail to intrigue me that Audrey appears to get far more out of my letters than I write, judging from her response(s) (letters, Oct 18). I recognise that some correspondents will misunderstand or even twist an author's words and misrepresent motives - they put their inaccurate interpretation or spin to what is written, either innocently or deliberately for political gain to espouse their particular cause or get their particular point of view across. Fair enough. Did I really 'plead' that 'Farage's contribution to Brexit was negligible'? That was not my intention - in my opinion, to suggest that Nigel's contribution to Brexit was negligible would be spin and a misrepresentation of what I wrote. If it was not for Nigel's party (which I joined from the outset), there would not have been the 2016 referendum which Audrey so dislikes the result of. In Audrey's opinion my descriptive word of 'zealot' is an 'insult'. Well this Brexit zealot, welcomes the Remainer / Rejoiner zealot, Audrey's revelation that from the outset she wanted to ignore, thwart and stop the wishes of the 17.4 million voters who voted Leave in the democratic referendum on our membership of the EU. Audrey told us that in her personal online research, she could not find ANY positives for Brexit. Is that not like saying a thief cannot fins a policeman? I'm a Brexiteer, Audrey is a Remainer /Rejoiner - we're both biased; I have my truth, she has hers; we're never going to agree, so let's agree to disagree and move on. From my point of view there are far more important issues in the world to be concerned about than to be re-addressing the Brexit arguments - the next world awaits. IAN SMITH, Bury St Edmunds. Load-Date: November 14, 2023  End of Document
