   Anger as Brexit blamed for pandemic distractions The Express June 14, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 16,17 Length: 758 words Byline: Sarah O'Grady Body   BREXITEERS erupted in fury yesterday after the Covid inquiry heard efforts to leave the EU "crowded out" planning to tackle the pandemic. The inquiry's lead lawyer told the first day of the public hearings a possible no-deal exit may have drained the "resources and capacity" needed. But MPs and pro-Leave campaigners insisted Britain led the world vaccination race precisely because of the break with Brussels. Meanwhile, relatives holding pictures of loved ones who died during the coronavirus outbreak staged a moving reminder as they gathered outside the hearing at Dorland House, West London. Delusional Inside, Hugo Keith KC argued Brexit preparations distracted the Government from making improvements needed to the strategy on how to tackle a deadly pandemic. He said they prevented necessary planning and the UK was not "very well prepared at all" for "significant aspects" of the virus - recorded on 226,977 death certificates. Longtime Brexiteer Jacob Rees- Mogg, newly knighted in Boris Johnson's controversial honours list, said: "The diehard Remainers think that everything is caused by Brexit, which is delusional. "Unfortunately, this foolish comment starts the inquiry off on the wrong foot." Commentator and former European Parliament member Patrick O'Flynn added: "Levering such ludicrous anti-Brexit sentiment into such a nationally important inquiry is a foolish and self-indulgent thing to do. "It risks undermining the standing of the inquiry in the eyes of millions of people. The lawyers earning a fortune from this undertaking should stick to the core mission." Tory MP Paul Bristow, whose Peterborough constituency voted Leave in the 2016 Brexit referendum, dubbed Mr Keith's statement "blatantly absurd". He said: "In fact, it was because we were outside the EU we were able to put in place our own arrangements for the procurement of vaccines. "The UK was the first nation in Europe to start vaccinating and this was a Brexit dividend." Mr Keith told inquiry chairwoman Baroness Hallett: "The pandemic struck the United Kingdom just as it was leaving the European Union. "That departure required an enormous amount of planning and preparation, particularly to address what were likely to be the severe consequences of a no-deal exit on food and medicine supplies, travel and transport, business borders and so on. "It is clear that such planning, from 2018 onwards, crowded out and prevented some, or perhaps a majority of, the improvements that central government itself understood were required to be made to resilience planning and preparedness." He added: "Did the attention therefore paid to the risks of a no-deal exit - Operation Yellowhammer as it was known - drain the resources and capacity that should have been continuing the fight against the next pandemic, that should have been utilised in preparing the United Kingdom for civil emergency? "Or did all that generic and operational planning in fact lead to people being better trained and well marshalled and, in fact, better prepared to deal with Covid and also to the existence of improved trade, medicine and supply links? "My Lady, on the evidence so far... but it will be a matter for you... we very much fear that it was the former." nting land, litical ousel Claire Mitchell KC, representing bereaved families in Scotland, also blamed Brexit for political leaders "presiding over a carousel of chaos". She said she believed the UK's preparedness was diminished by "years of changes to critical establishments and the effects of Brexit". She demanded answers over whether politicians in the UK and devolved administrations could put aside political differences and act in the public interest. Ms Mitchell also sought justifications for delays in lockdown and the Eat Out to Help Out scheme. A Northern Ireland Department of Health lawyer said Brexit did divert some focus away from Covid preparedness planning, "as was no doubt the case" for all four UK nations. f Harrowing Nea th tages asso preparatio But Neasa Murnaghan KC told the inquiry there were also some advantages associated with the EU exit preparations. She said they included recently trained staff for emergencies and increased buffer stocks of medicines. cies an med Th ser vie wh sto dyiL The inquiry also heard a series of poignant video interviews with bereaved families, which included harrowing stories of some loved ones dying alone from Covid. Lady Hallett pledged those who suffered in the pandemic will "always be at the heart of the inquiry". The probe is expected to last three years. OPINION: PAGE 12 expect Graphic    Tragic toll... bereaved families outside inquiry yesterdayPicture: LUCY NORTH/PA Load-Date: June 14, 2023  End of Document
