   Angus Robertson to join Rutherglen by-election campaign trail for pro-EU day The National (Scotland) September 23, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 587 words Byline: Abbi Garton-Crosbie Body   ANGUS Robertson is set to join Katy Loudon on the Rutherglen and Hamilton West by-election trail as part of a pro-EU campaign day. The Constitution and External Affairs Secretary and the SNP candidate will be joined by the minister for Europe, Christina McKelvie MSP, and the SNP-s Europe spokesperson at Westminster, Alyn Smith MP on Saturday. Loudon said she -won-t stop working to secure Scotland-s return to the EU- ahead of the campaign event and a year after Liz Truss's mini-budget tanked the pound and caused the UK's EU divorce bill to soar by tens of millions of pounds. READ MORE: Holyrood Weekly podcast: Court of Session Section 35 showdown debrief The SNP say the mini-budget added an extra 91m on to the UK's Brexit deal payment, footed by the taxpayer. It comes as the LibDems were accused of -throwing in the towel- after leader Ed Davey said rejoining the EU is -currently off the table-. With the Tories and Labour both embracing Brexit, the SNP say they are now the only mainstream party campaigning to rejoin the bloc. The SNP-s by-election candidate Loudon highlighted that 63% of voters in South Lanarkshire voted to remain in the EU at the 2016 EU referendum and pointed to the greater equality, lower poverty rates, higher social mobility and higher business investment of comparable independent countries in the EU such as Ireland, Denmark and Sweden. -The people of Rutherglen and Hamilton West, like the rest of Scotland, never wanted to leave the EU, but we were dragged out anyway and forced to pay the cost by a Westminster government we didn-t vote for,- Loudon (above) said. -We are still paying for it a year on from Truss's disastrous mini-budget. -Unlike the pro-Brexit Labour party, I won-t stop fighting to right that wrong for my area and secure Scotland-s return to the EU with independence. -Comparable nations like Ireland, Denmark and Sweden are all wealthier and fairer than the UK. -READ MORE: DLC's track record raises concerns over development on Scottish loch -Scotland has everything it needs to achieve that success including a wealth of natural and renewable energy resources - the only thing holding us back is Westminster, and the Brexit and austerity it has imposed on us. -Brexit has been a disaster for Rutherglen and Hamilton West - it has cost us at least 156 million, fuelled the cost of living crisis and crippled our NHS with a labour shortage. We deserve better than this. -Both of the Westminster parties have turned their backs on Scotland and ignored its wants and needs. Vote SNP on October 5 for Scotland-s return to the EU, and a fairer, wealthier, greener country.- Loudon previously accused Labour of -sticking their head in the sand- over Brexit, with figures showing the area has lost out on millions of pounds in EU trade. She challenged her Labour rival Michael Shanks (above) to outline his position and what other principles he is -prepared to sell out on-. The Labour candidate cancelled his membership over the party-s stance on Brexit, describing its approach to EU membership as -bankrupt-, but rejoined and is standing for the party, hoping to become its second Scottish MP. He has previously tried to distance himself from Labour leader Keir Starmer on a number of issues including the EU. Shanks said he still sees the UK as -having a place in the European Union- - but added it-s -not a question for just now-. It comes as Labour doubled down on their pro-Brexit stance after comments made by Starmer at a summit in Canada appeared to show another shift in policy. Load-Date: September 23, 2023  End of Document
