   Another Brexit cliff edge for the UK auto industry Birmingham Post August 24, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 20 Length: 942 words Byline: David Bailey Body   IS Brexit about to throw another spanner in the works of the auto industry? That's the fear of many in the UK and EU auto industry as 10% tariffs effectively loom next year for Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) traded between the two, at a time when governments are pressing the industry to go electric. New 'rules of origin' requirements kick in next year and will mean that car makers on both sides of the Channel will only avoid tariffs if at least 45% of the value of a BEV's components and 60% of its battery come from the UK or EU. Under an Annex to the Brexit Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) some flexibility was built in for automakers until next year, with a lower value of parts in a BEV being needed to qualify for zero tariffs. That flexibility was seen as a British 'win', although it's not clear that the British side properly understood what it signed up to at the time. The problem is that batteries remain costly and many BEV components come from Asia and in particular China, which has been busy building a BEV industry and battery supply chain for years. In other words, the high proportion of BEVs' non-EU content means that trade in BEVs between the EU and UK could well face 10% tariffs, thereby pushing up prices while international combustion engine (ICE) cars won't face tariffs. That's an odd position to be in when both the UK and EU are trying to encourage a switch to BEVs in order to get greenhouse gas emissions down and to reach net zero. While the UK has been pressing for the rule of origin tightening to be delayed, the European Commission isn't keen, so far at least, highlighting the role of Biden's Inflation Reduction Act in wooing major battery investment away from the EU. The latter has slowed the EU's own effort to build a battery supply chain, which it wants to do to reduce reliance on China in particular. The EU's fear is that relaxing rules of origin requirements would see batteries being made in the US and China and imported to the EU or UK before going into a BEV being assembled, further undermining the EU's efforts to build a battery supply chain. EU Commissioner Maroš Šefcovic has said that the EU won't move on this as it wants auto makers and battery firms to invest in batterymaking capacity. Nevertheless, he did ask Acea (the European Auto Employers' Association) to submit evidence of potential damage to the industry, which could open the door to a change of heart at the Commission at some point. Concern over the looming rules of origin change recently prompted Stellantis (which makes Vauxhall vehicles in the UK) to warn in a submission to the Commons Business Committee that its UK operations risked being at a Trade electric between the could well tariffs, up "competitive disadvantage" and that "if the cost of EV manufacturing in the UK becomes uncompetitive and unsustainable, operations will close." It added that there won't be enough battery production in either the UK or in Europe to meet the TCA rules. Meanwhile, Acea has argued for TCA rules to be extended (to 2026), arguing that customs duties on EU BEV exports to the UK could by then stack up to (EURO)4.3bn, with the effect of reducing EU auto makers' BEV sales in the UK by as much as 500,000 cars. The irony is that while the EU wants to see a battery supply chain built in the EU, actually imposing the tariff may well be a huge own goal as it could see BEVs made in the UK and EU undercut by cheaper, Chinese made ones, thereby handing the Chinese auto industry a huge boost. There appear to be tentative talks between the UK and EU on the issue, but not yet at the top-table. The deadline for increasing locally sourced battery components is hard-wired into the Brexit trade deal. battery vehicles EU and UK face 10% pushing prices Extending it would need agreement by both sides, that is through a resolution of both British and EU members of the joint partnership council that governs the Brexit trade deal. That is doable but the council has met only twice since being set up, and the clock is ticking. The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) has highlighted that the real deadline isn't January 2024 but rather right now as auto makers are already planning production and exports for next year. A last-minute fix isn't going to help them much, and SMMT fears that the industry faces yet another "cliff-edge" over trade rules, just as it saw in the run up to the trade deal being agreed originally. The EU's view is that the position has been clear for auto makers for "production planning purposes" since the start of 2021 so this is all hardly a surprise. That may be correct but a number of factors have changed since then, notably the huge level of support in the US for battery making which has been a game changer, the increase in prices for materials going into batteries (pushing up the cost of batteries) and the slower than expected build out of an EU supply chain. Put simply, the world has changed since the Brexit trade deal was done. What this means is the EU's desire to make sure that BEV value chains aren't offshored to other parts of the world now risks damaging the very auto industry it wants to support. The industry on both sides of the Channel is speaking with a clear voice. It's time for both sides to listen. There is a deal to be done here - let's hope common sense prevails. Professor David Bailey works at the Birmingham Business School and is a Senior Fellow at the UK in a Changing Europe programme looming recently  boost. There tentative UK and but top-  Trade in battery electric vehicles between the EU and UK could well face 10% tariffs, thereby pushing up prices  in sides, resolution Graphic    Just as the UK and EU are trying to encourage us to go electric there is a Brexit spanner in the works Load-Date: August 24, 2023  End of Document
