   As he jets off to the jungle... Nigel Farage is a huge Celebrity on TikTok? Get out of here! MailOnline November 11, 2023 Saturday 11:57 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 381 words Byline: Katie Hind Body   The former Brexit Party leader has become a TikTok sensation with his videos Some of his 380,000 followers have nicknamed Mr Farage, 59, the 'GOAT' Today's youngsters may be notorious for their unyielding devotion to woke causes and contempt for anyone who dares say the wrong thing. Yet it seems at least some of Generation Z are bucking that trend and embracing the most unlikely of political figures: Nigel Farage. The former Brexit Party leader has become something of a TikTok sensation, with his videos on topics such as smoking legislation, transgender rights and immigration racking up 6.5 million likes. Some of his 380,000 followers have nicknamed the proudly politically incorrect politician the 'GOAT' - an acronym for the 'greatest of all time' - the 'true Brexit geezer' and 'the man we need in charge' of Britain. Meanwhile, the video of him holding a pint of beer as he told voters that 'Brexit means Brexit' has become a meme, with users making their own remixes. Around a quarter of TikTok users are aged between 13 and 25, defined as Generation Z, and Mr Farage's command of social media may prove crucial to his success on I'm A Celebrity, which starts its new series on ITV next Sunday. The 59-year-old GB News presenter was yesterday spotted boarding a Singapore Airlines flight to Australia - though fellow travellers at Heathrow could hardly miss him in his salmon-pink blazer. He also found time for a quick drink in the Queen's Arms in Terminal Two before his 24-hour flight to Brisbane. Mr Farage is said to be 'enjoying' engaging with the younger generations on TikTok and hopes he can encourage their interest in politics. He also gave that as the reason he was entering the jungle - for a rumoured £1 million fee - saying: 'You've got about ten million young people who watch that programme. These are people who don't really watch the news... so in my mind, if I was to do it, I might be able to connect with that audience.' In a recent TikTok video, viewed 7 million times, he spoke about the prospect of rapists avoiding jail due to prison overcrowding saying: 'I think this is a total outrage. I wonder what you think? Shouldn't we just build some more prisons and send the bad dudes to jail?' One user replied: 'This fella is actually starting to make some sense.' Load-Date: November 12, 2023  End of Document
