   At a glance; Domestic policy ++ Thuringia, Saxony and Brandenburg: AfD well ahead in some polls ++ Scholz on the meeting of right-wing politicians: Learning from history ++ Love affair in the Berlin Senate: Günther-Wünsch: "Everything clarified" ++ Foreign policy ++ Genocide accusation against Israel: Habeck expresses incomprehension ++ London's mayor: Brexit cost economy billions ++ Philippines: Baerbock criticizes China ++ US Republican primary campaign: Ex-Governor Christie drops out ++ Knowledge ++ Homeopathy as a health insurance benefit: Minister wants to stop funding ++ Covid activity in Germany: RKI: indications of decline ++ Economy and money ++ Renewable energies: Expansion is increasing rapidly ++ Citizen's income: Heil's plans falter ++ Nursing home care: additional payment increases ++ Premium cars: Mercedes falls behind ++ Bitcoin cryptocurrency: US regulator approves index funds ++ Day on the stock market: Dax weaker ++ Sport ++ European handball championship: Wolff encourages dreaming ++ Ice field hockey: world governing body excludes Israel ++ Return to the Bundesliga: Sancho signs with BVB ++ Culture and society ++ Science fiction cinema: the artificial womb is here ++ Raid on Reichsbürger scene: posing as public prosecutors? ++ Afghanistan: magnitude 6.4 earthquake ++ Ski slope in California: Avalanche kills one person Die Welt (English) January 12, 2024 Friday  Copyright 2024 Axel Springer SE All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; AT A GLANCE; Pg. 2; No. 9 Length: 2786 words Body   Domestic politics Thuringia, Saxony and Brandenburg AfD well ahead in some polls If the state parliaments in Saxony, Thuringia and Brandenburg were elected at the beginning of 2024, the AfD would be the strongest party by a clear margin in some cases, according to a Forsa poll. According to the RTL/ntv trend barometer published on Thursday, it could expect 36% of the votes in Thuringia, 34% in Saxony and 32% in Brandenburg. In Thuringia, the CDU can currently expect 20 percent of the vote, the Left Party 17 percent, the SPD nine percent, the Greens five percent and the alliance of former Left Party politician Sahra Wagenknecht (BSW) four percent. This means that the current red-red-green coalition is far from a majority. In Saxony and Brandenburg, on the other hand, the current three-party coalitions could continue. In Saxony, the CDU would receive 30 percent, the SPD seven percent and the Greens eight percent, with the BSW also receiving four percent. In Brandenburg, the SPD could expect 22%, the CDU 16% and the Greens 7%. Elections will be held in all three federal states in September. You can find a commentary on page 7. Scholz on the meeting of right-wing politicians Learning from history  "We protect everyone": Chancellor Olaf Scholz (SPD) has responded to reports of a meeting of right-wing politicians and activists in Potsdam with an urgent appeal. "Learning from history is not just lip service. Democrats must stand together," wrote Scholz on the online platform X. Anyone who opposes the free democratic basic order is a case for the Office for the Protection of the Constitution and the judiciary. At the meeting in November, some radical theses on migration policy were discussed. Several AfD politicians were among the participants. "We will not allow anyone to differentiate the 'we' in our country according to whether someone has an immigration history or not," wrote Scholz. "We protect everyone - regardless of origin, skin color or how uncomfortable someone is for fanatics with assimilation fantasies." Read more on page 4. Love affair in the Berlin Senate Günther-Wünsch: "Everything has been clarified " Less than a week after her relationship with Berlin's governing mayor Kai Wegner became public, Senator for Education Katharina Günther-Wünsch (both CDU) has spoken out. "I can fully understand that the situation that arose last Friday is new," Günther-Wünsch told the Tagesspiegel newspaper. "The question of how to keep this separate and still be professional in your offices and functions is totally justified." However, they had found a solution that was acceptable to the government and created clear responsibilities. "And I think that clarifies everything." Because of the relationship, new rules to avoid conflicts of interest apply in the Senate with immediate effect. You can read more about this in the column at the top left. Foreign policy Genocide accusation against Israel Habeck expresses incomprehension Vice-Chancellor Robert Habeck cannot understand South Africa's accusation of genocide against Israel for its actions in the Gaza war. The Green politician said during a visit to the Israeli city of Sderot that he had no empathy for the people who were suffering in the Gaza Strip and losing families and children "as a result of this terrible conflict ". "But genocide is something else, it is the deliberate extermination of ethnic groups or religious communities, the targeted extermination." The first hearing on South Africa's genocide complaint against Israel began at the International Court of Justice in The Hague on Thursday. You can find a report on this on page 6. London's mayor Brexit cost the economy billions  "It's obvious that Brexit is not working": London Mayor Sadiq Khan calls for the UK to move closer to the European Union again. This emerges from parts of a speech that the Labour politician wanted to give in the City of London on Thursday evening. Among other things, Khan referred to a study according to which the estimated gross value added in the UK in 2023 would have been 140 billion pounds (around 162 billion euros) higher without Brexit. The country urgently needs to build a closer relationship with the EU to stop its decline, said Khan, who wants to stand for re-election this year. It is "now obvious that Brexit is not working ". If you believe a recently published survey by opinion research institute Opinium on behalf of the Observer newspaper, Khan speaks from the hearts of the British people. According to the survey, a clear majority of voters believe that Brexit has done more harm than good. Philippines Baerbock criticizes China After crisis diplomacy in the Middle East, the Foreign Minister is now in a region of the world where China is trying to expand its power. During a visit to Manila, Annalena Baerbock (Greens) criticized Beijing for its actions in the South China Sea. Risky maneuvers by the Chinese coast guard were "calling into question the freedom of sea routes guaranteed under international law for countries around the world", she said at a meeting with her Philippine counterpart Enrique Manalo. And this "in an area through which a third of global maritime trade flows ", she added. The Foreign Ministry in Beijing reacted immediately: countries that were not part of the region had no right to interfere in the affairs of China and relevant states in the South China Sea, it said. You can read an editorial on Baerbock's travel diplomacy on page 7. US Republican primary campaign Ex-Governor Christie drops out Another Republican is withdrawing from the election campaign for the highest office in the USA: US Republican Chris Christie is dropping out of the race for the White House. He realizes that there is "no way for him to win the nomination", said the former governor of the US state of New Jersey. In the Republican field of candidates, former President Donald Trump is far ahead in the polls. He is followed by Florida Governor Ron DeSantis and former US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley. Knowledge Homeopathy as a health insurance benefit Minister wants to stop funding  "The basis of our policy must be scientific evidence" Federal Health Minister Karl Lauterbach (SPD) wants to cancel the funding of homeopathic treatments by statutory health insurance providers. Homeopathy makes no sense as a health insurance benefit, he wrote on the online platform X. Climate change "cannot be combated with dowsing rods" either. A service without medical benefit "should not be paid for either ", said Lauterbach. Homeopathic medicines can be based on plant, mineral and animal substances. The extremely diluted substances are administered in the form of globules, for example. The scientific consensus is that homeopathic treatments have no proven effect beyond placebo effects. Covid activity in Germany RKI: indications of a decline After weeks of strong spread of the coronavirus in Germany, the momentum now seems to be slowing down. Experts from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) report in their weekly report on acute respiratory diseases that there are increasing indications of a decline in Covid-19 activity. This applies, for example, to the viral load measured in wastewater. Overall, the RKI estimates that there were around 4.6 million acute respiratory illnesses last week, regardless of whether they had been seen by a doctor. This is significantly fewer than before Christmas, when this figure was just under nine million in some cases. However, the level is still slightly higher than at the beginning of 2023. Economy and money Renewable energies Expansion is increasing rapidly In 2023, the expansion of renewable energy capacities worldwide increased by 50 percent compared to the previous year to almost 510 gigawatts (GW), with photovoltaics accounting for three quarters of this growth. This was reported by the International Energy Agency (IEA). The greatest growth was in China, which commissioned as many photovoltaic systems in 2023 as the entire world did in 2022. The expansion of wind energy in China increased by 66%. According to the IEA, the expansion of renewable energy capacities also reached record levels in Europe, the USA and Brazil. And yet, in the agency's view, the pace is not sufficient to achieve the targets set at the World Climate Conference. You can find out how this development should be assessed in the commentary on page 7. The report can be found on page 9. Citizen's income Heil's plans are faltering Shortly before the turn of the year, Federal Minister of Labor Hubertus Heil (SPD) announced that "total refusers" would soon have their citizen's allowance completely cut off for up to two months if they refused to take up reasonable work. The corresponding legal text is still only a draft. But now Heil is facing trouble. This is because a ruling by the Constitutional Court sets strict limits on this plan. According to legal expert Alexander Thiele, the work offered by the job centers must be both reasonable and "living wage work ". You can read exactly what this means in the report on page 10. Nursing home care Additional payment increases The financial burden on nursing home residents rose by 19.2 percent last year, as reported by the AOK Scientific Institute. According to the analysis, care home residents were reimbursed an average of 569 euros per month by care insurance at the end of 2023. On average, they had to pay an additional 874 euros for care themselves, plus 909 euros for accommodation and meals and 484 euros for investment costs. This results in a total burden of 2267 euros per month for those in need of care. In 2017, this was more than 23 percent lower at 1752 euros. Premium cars Mercedes falls behind The car manufacturer Mercedes-Benz sold roughly the same number of cars in 2023 as in the previous year. Sales amounted to 2.04 million cars, according to the company. Growth in Europe was just able to compensate for lower deliveries in the most important market, China, and in North America. Bottlenecks in the supply chain, particularly for models with modern 48-volt on-board electrics, dampened sales in the high-volume core segment, such as the GLC SUV model. The brand with the three-pointed star fell to number two behind the global market leader for premium cars, BMW. The Munich-based company increased sales by 7.3 percent to 2.3 million cars. Third-placed premium manufacturer Audi caught up: The VW subsidiary knocked off 17 percent more cars with almost 1.9 million. Bitcoin cryptocurrency US regulator approves index funds For the first time, investors can invest in Bitcoin index funds that track the price of the cryptocurrency. The US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has now approved the first Bitcoin ETFs. At the same time, SEC chief Gary Gensler warned that the digital currency is "speculative and highly volatile" and has also been used for money laundering and other illegal activities. Investors should be careful - there are a "myriad" of risks. Even if these financial products are only offered in the USA, the decision has global consequences for the cryptocurrency market. Find out more on page 12. Day on the stock exchange Dax weaker Surprisingly high consumer prices in the USA weighed on the Dax on Thursday. Following the data, the leading German index gave up its daily gains and ultimately closed down 0.86% at 16,547.03 points, just above its low for the day reached shortly before. In the morning, the Dax had come a little closer to its record high at around 16,840 points. The MDax closed 0.68 percent lower at 26,069.95 points. Further stock market data can be found on page 9. Sports European Handball Championship Wolff inspires dreams National handball goalkeeper Andreas Wolff has been showered with praise by his team-mates after his magnificent performance at the start of the European Championships. "I knew he was good, but that was from another planet," enthused playmaker Juri Knorr after the brilliant 27:14 victory over Switzerland in the Düsseldorf soccer stadium. A world record crowd of 53,586 spectators witnessed a German keeper in top form right at the start of the tournament. Wolff saved 13 shots from the Swiss - a brilliant rate of around 60 percent. "That's just incredible. When you have a goalkeeper like that behind you, you can't lose a game like that," said right winger Timo Kastening. Germany can seal their place in the main round with a win against North Macedonia on Sunday. More on the European Championship opener on page 13. Ice hockey World association excludes Israel The Ice Hockey World Federation IIHF has excluded Israel from its World Championship tournaments for security reasons. It justified the decision with its duty of care to "protect all participants in IIHF competitions ". The decision would apply until the safety and well-being of all participants, including Israeli participants, could be guaranteed. The statement did not mention whether any other country had objections to playing against Israel. Nor did it mention the Gaza war between Israel and the Islamist Hamas. The world governing body had used similar wording on security to justify its decision to exclude Russia and Belarus from the competition following the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Return to the Bundesliga Sancho signs for BVB Jadon Sancho's move to Borussia Dortmund is complete. The England international from Manchester United is moving to the Bundesliga club on loan until the summer. This was confirmed by the fifth-placed team in the table. The 23-year-old attacker, who is under contract in Manchester until 2026, is expected to cost around three million euros. Sancho already played for BVB from 2017 to 2021. "Jadon is an absolute difference player and I'm looking forward to seeing him back in black and yellow soon. Even though he hasn't played any competitive games in recent months, we are sure that he will quickly settle back in with us, get back to his best and use his qualities to help us achieve our goals for the season," said BVB sporting director Sebastian Kehl. Culture and society Science fiction cinema The artificial womb is here Men are known to have a biological flaw: they cannot get pregnant or carry a child to term. For years, scientists have been researching artificial wombs to compensate for this injustice of nature. "Baby to go", the new film by French-American director Sophie Barthe, is set in a future in which artificial wombs are part of everyday life. You can buy them in stores, men and women can carry their fetuses around in them. They look like eggs. Read on page 16 to find out how Barthes' romantic comedy differs from other cinematic visions of the future. Raid on the Reichsbürger scene Posing as public prosecutors? Police in North Rhine-Westphalia and Lower Saxony have raided the homes of six suspected members of the Reichsbürger scene who are alleged to have illegally posed as public prosecutors. According to the police in Nienburg, Lower Saxony, special forces were also involved in the raids on the suspects, who are aged between 56 and 67. The aim was to secure evidence. No arrests were made. The searches took place in Rinteln in Lower Saxony and in Vlotho, Porta Westfalica, Herford, Detmold and Bielefeld in North Rhine-Westphalia. The suspects are said to have posed as public prosecutors in e-mails or fax messages. The public prosecutor's office is investigating misuse of titles. Afghanistan Earthquake with a magnitude of 6.4 A severe earthquake occurred in north-eastern Afghanistan on Thursday, which was felt as far away as the capital Kabul and neighboring Pakistan. According to the US earthquake observatory USGS, the quake had a magnitude of 6.4 and its epicenter was located in the province of Badakhshan in the Hindu Kush mountain region. There were initially no reports of casualties or property damage. The tremors also caused buildings to sway in Kabul, around 300 kilometers away, and in Pakistan. Ski slope in California Avalanche kills one person One person has died in an avalanche in a Californian ski resort. Three other skiers were swept away by the masses of snow and suffered minor injuries, according to the Palisades Tahoe administration. The avalanche, which was almost 50 meters wide, broke loose shortly after the start of skiing operations on Wednesday. For hours, more than 100 helpers searched the avalanche cone with sniffer dogs. Avalanches on ski slopes are rare. Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word.   Original full page PDF Original full page PDF Load-Date: January 11, 2024  End of Document
