   Bailey hails our prospects Scottish Daily Mail October 5, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 61 Length: 379 words Byline: Alex Brummer Body   WHEN Prospect magazine scooped up Andrew Bailey for an interview it doubtless had dreams of some crushing narrative on the disaster of Brexit. Bailey is not his predecessor Mark Carney, who has been ferociously disparaging about life for Britain cut off from the EU. At my own encounters with Bailey, before and since he became Bank of England Governor, he has always appeared a glass halffull optimist when it comes to the UK post-Brexit. In his interview with former FT editor Lionel Barber, the Governor will have disappointed those who would like to see the UK cuddle back up to Brussels. Invited to inveigh against Brexit, he mildly retorted that if you reduced the openness of an economy there will be 'short-term' negative effects. He pointed out that over the longer haul the UK would build new relationships. Financial services, the UK's ace up the sleeve, could be a beneficiary. The assumption that Brexit will result in a 4pc decline of GDP over time, as the Office for Budget Responsibility forecast, is unproven. The UK's trade balance with the rest of the world has deteriorated. However, real GDP (output adjusted for inflation) since the Brexit referendum is slap in the middle of the G7 club of rich nations, level pegging with France and better than Germany and Italy. Bailey argues Brexit 'created opportunities' for the City with much of the market and industry still in the UK. This, in spite of efforts by President Macron, among others, to seduce activity across the Channel. On other fronts Bailey defended the Bank against criticism that 'groupthink' meant it was slow off the mark to tackle inflation. Yet in citing other central banks, as largely in line with Britain, he was acknowledging a global, if not Threadneedle Street, like thinking. Prospect saw the Bank's approach to the Truss eruption on bond markets as Bailey's finest hour. Bailey speedily was off the mark in bailing out pension funds after the near-failure of liability driven investments (LDIs). It is often forgotten that the warnings about the dangers in turning gilt-edged stock into derivatives have been in plain sight for some years yet the Bank, with responsibility for stability, did nothing. It plotted an escape route from a catastrophe which was on its radar: but failed to act. Load-Date: October 5, 2023  End of Document
