   Basking in the sunlit uplands The Journal (Newcastle, UK) September 28, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 20 Length: 439 words Body   I FEEL the need to address John Hodgkins' letter of September 19. He suggests my earlier correspondence was insulting to millions of voters who supported Brexit. But this wasn't my intention. My UK comments were aimed solely at those who insist on carrying the dead Brexit parrot around, in a gilded cage, in the mistaken belief it can be miraculously revived by an incoming Labour government. It can't! I accept that many of those who voted for Brexit did so in good faith, on the back of promises made about funds for the NHS, education, infrastructure, increased housing provision, lower rents and mortgages, higher wages and lower food prices, increases in productivity and boosts to fishing and farming once the shackles of the EU we're thrown off! A global Britain basking in the economic and social sunlit uplands of a post-Brexit utopia. A significant majority now accept they were lied to and accept the parrot they bought is dead and not sleeping; buyers' remorse abounds. The Northern Ireland Protocol has been redrafted, the UK has rejoined the Horizon European Research Programme, ditched proposals for a UK-only product safety mark and delayed, yet again, the inspection of EU food imports. As Prof Chris Grey succinctly put it, "the paradox of Brexit is that it works best when it isn't implemented". The bird is definitely deceased. Mr Hodgkins cites Nye Bevan's opposition to the then developing EU, as if this somehow clinches the argument for leaving - it doesn't! Tony Benn was also a prominent Eurosceptic but this was long before economic globalisation, adoption of the EU Social Chapter and the rise of populism. Neither man would have objected to the EU's founding aim, to prevent economic competition descending into military conflict, repeating the horrors of WWI and WWII. Neither man would have been happy to see their country's economic policies set by the neoliberal European Research Group, nor the Institute for Economic Affairs. Neither would have been happy for control to be "taken back" and handed to political anarchists like Liz Truss and Boris Johnson, or the unelected Dominic Cummings, with their illegal attempts to prorogue a "sovereign" parliament! Unlike the likes of Bill Cash and Nigel Farage, who campaigned for decades for the UK to leave the EU, Mr Hodgkins believes "Remoaners" should simply "buckle up and enjoy the rollercoaster ride that is Brexit." Or better still, leap on small boats, jump non-existent queues and seek asylum in those bastions of human rights, Belarus and Russia! May I suggest both likelihoods are a dead bird of a whole different species. Mike Bradley, Rowlands Gill Load-Date: September 28, 2023  End of Document
