   BLAMELESS BREXIT, FACEBOOK FRAUD AND ULEZ HONESTY Metro (UK) August 31, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10,11 Length: 749 words Body   ? Thank you, Jeff Hall (MetroTalk, Wed). I am so glad to see someone finally mentioning how the situation outside the UK is. He said that, having relatives in Germany, he has seen that we are not alone in suffering severe economic hardship, so our problems cannot be laid at the door of Brexit. I keep reading letters that everything here is just awful following Brexit and the EU is some magical land where everything is going perfectly. I am originally from Munich and my family and friends still live there and I agree 100 per cent with what Jeff said - that people are choosing between heating and eating, and visiting food banks. That is the sad situation in Germany right now and the government has no time to worry about anything to do with the citizens as they are too busy fighting between themselves like little kids. May I add, I have friends in other EU countries and they are having exactly the same issue. This is a global problem that everyone is fighting at the moment and nothing to do with Brexit. Daniela, London ? Jeff Hall states that not everything in Germany is rosy economically. While having concern, it's not a race to the bottom. My worry is how much better we could perform if not shackled by Brexit. Simon, Luton ? So sad to hear about disabled mother Rebecca Webster getting scammed on Facebook (Metro, Tue). The benefits officer was duped out of £370 trying to book an adapted holiday villa in France. To be honest, I was not surprised. There will be many more lives ruined - this is just the tip of the iceberg as most scams go unreported due to embarrassment and shame. I have seen hundreds of scam adverts on Facebook. For example, I was looking to buy a car and every other advert was a scam - too-good-to-be-true prices, along with the usual story that they were selling on behalf of a friend who had to leave the country in an emergency, or some dodgy delivery scheme. I have reported many of these ads but there was no decrease in the number of them. The government needs to step up its game and deal with the problem. Shahid Sheraz, West Yorkshire ? I'm at a loss to understand why Heathrow Airport and the surrounding boroughs are included in the Ultra Low Emission Zone, which launched this week, meaning drivers of older cars must pay £12.50 to drive into London. Hundreds of plane landings and take-offs occur there daily, 365 days a year. Car pollution is of little significance to the environment in that area. Nick Smith, London ? Please would you publish the truth about the Tory attitude to Ulez. Charges were first proposed by Boris Johnson as London mayor. Grant Shapps was backing an expanded area years ago. Vanessa Allen, Beckenham ? The facts are clear, pollution kills. And fewer than ten per cent of cars are bad polluters and should be replaced. Of course it impacts the owners of these old cars, but they do get some help in changing to a less-polluting vehicle and probably should have done that years ago. Ulez in central London has cut pollution significantly, pollution in outer London is bad. It is time to move on: get the old bangers onto the scrap heap, not thousands of people into hospitals. It's a simple message. As for Keir Starmer's caution on the topic, has he got no guts at all?! Pollution kills and should be cut as much and as soon as possible. For once stay with the truth . David Reed, Swiss Cottage n Peter Bavington (MetroTalk, Wed) asks why a depleted battery on an electric vehicle cannot be exchanged for a full one. There are two batteries in every EV, a larger lithium-ion battery to power the engine and a smaller lead-acid battery for the electronics systems. The lithium-ion battery weighs from 100kg to 550kg, so a weightlifter at every charging point would be needed for Peter's proposal. Clark Cross, Linlithgow n I have read a lot of negative comments on the topic of India's moon landing and whether we should be giving it foreign aid. I want to add my views on this. To make the facts clear as per the latest research by the renowned economist Utsa Patnaik (published by Columbia University Press). Patnaik calculated that Britain drained a total of nearly $45trillion from India during the period 1765 to 1938. The figure of $45trillion is 17 times more than the total annual GDP of the UK today. Is the UK government going to return this amount to India in the near future? Arvind Verma, Manchester You are more likely to be  published if you provide your name and location with your comment @MetroUK @MetroFeatures @metrosportHQ Load-Date: August 31, 2023  End of Document
