   Brexit border controls stalled again as Treasury warns of effect on food prices Financial Times (London, England) August 30, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1 Length: 377 words Byline: LUCY FISHER;PETER FOSTER Body   The government has confirmed a fifth delay to the implementation of its post-Brexit border controls on food and fresh products, as ministers admitted that the new regime on EU imports would push up prices. The Cabinet Office said yesterday that the plans were likely to have an impact on headline inflation, although it insisted that the effect was "expected to be minor", estimating that it would increase the rate by less than 0.2 per cent across three years. Ministers confirmed the move, first reported by the Financial Times last week, to push back the launch of new paperwork requirements at the border from October to January. New physical checks on imports, due to come into effect in January, will now start in April. The latest delay to introducing border checks followed Treasury concerns over the inflationary impact of the incoming regime and a request by traders for more time to prepare. The post-Brexit controls on animal and plant products were originally meant to start in 2021. Full checks have been applied to British exports heading into the EU since January 2021, to the fury of UK farmers who believe they are competing against continental rivals on an uneven playing field. Shane Brennan, chief executive of the Cold Chain Federation, which represents the part of the logistics industry transporting products such as perishable food and cut flowers, said the delay was sensible because of the inflationary impact of the new border. "These Brexit checks will fuel food price inflation whenever they are brought in and so the longer they are held off the better," he said. But Brennan warned that the latest changes to the timetable "will not help us with the already massive task of making EU-based businesses aware that Brexit is, in fact, still not 'done' and they have to invest in the processes necessary to sell to UK customers from early next year". The Horticultural Trades Association, which represents the plant and nursery growing industry, said the revised plan for implementing the new border controls did "not go far enough" to address industry concerns. In May, the HTA warned that the new checks would impose costs of over £42mn a year in additional red tape on plant imports of more than £750mn a year, the bulk of which come via the EU. Load-Date: August 29, 2023  End of Document
