   Brexit is blamed for Covid pandemic distractions Scottish Express June 14, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 16,17 Length: 740 words Byline: Sarah O'Grady; Richard Elias Body   BREXITEERS erupted in fury yesterday after the Covid inquiry heard efforts to leave the EU "crowded out" planning to tackle the pandemic. The probe's lead lawyer told the first day of the public hearings a possible no-deal exit may have drained the "resources and capacity" needed. But MPs and pro-Brexit campaigners insisted Britain led the world vaccination race precisely because of the Brussels break. Relatives holding pictures of loved ones who died during the coronavirus outbreak gathered outside the hearing at Dorland House,West London. Inside, Hugo Keith KC said Brexit preparations distracted the Planning Government from making the improvements needed to the strategy on how to tackle a deadly pandemic. He said they prevented necessary planning and the UK was not "very well prepared at all" for "significant aspects" of the virus - recorded on 226,977 death certificates. Long-time Brexiteer Jacob Rees Mogg, newly knighted in Boris Johnson's controversial honours list, said: "The diehard Remainers think that everything is caused by Brexit, which is delusional." Tory MP Paul Bristow, whose Peterborough constituency voted Leave in the 2016 Brexit referendum, said Mr Keith's statement was "blatantly absurd". He added: "The UK was the first nation in Europe to start vaccinating and this was a Brexit dividend." Mr Keith told inquiry chairwoman Baroness Hallett: "Did the attention paid to the risks of a no-deal exit drain the resources and capacity that should have been continuing the fight against the next pandemic? "Or did all that planning in fact lead to people being better trained and well marshalled and, in fact, better prepared to deal with Covid? "My Lady, on the evidence so far... but it will be a matter for you...we very much fear it was the former." Claire Mitchell KC, representing bereaved families in Scotland, also blamed Brexit for political leaders "presiding over a carousel of chaos". She said she believed preparedness for the pandemic was diminished by "years of changes to critical establishments and the effects of Brexit". She demanded answers over whether politicians in the UK and devolved administrations could put aside political differences and act in the public interest, as well as justifications for delays in lockdown and the Eat Out to Help Out scheme. The inquiry also heard a series of video interviews with bereaved families, with harrowing stories of people dying alone from Covid. Relatives of Scots victims spoke of their utter shock at their loss. Dr Alan Wightman, 64, lost his mother Helen, a resident at Scoonie house care home in Leven, Fife. He said: "The care home went into lockdown and visiting was restricted. "Testing was only available to residents who were suspected to have Covid. "My mum became ill and a doctor was called for advice. My mum was tested for Covid but the results were inconclusive - the doctor was in no doubt that my mum had Covid. "After 48 hours, the home wanted to withdraw treatment but we did not agree. Treatment was eventually withdrawn and she passed away a few days later." Jan Gillan lost her husband, Mark aged just 53. She said his workplace had no Covid measures in place. Mrs Gillan, 58, added: "He had underlying health conditions and was waiting on his shielding letter. They (his employer) didn't have any PPE, not even facemasks. There was no guidance on social distancing. "Two colleagues who were told to isolate went into work. Shortly afterwards my husband became ill. His condition deteriorated and he was taken to Glasgow Royal Infirmary. "He was given oxygen, which didn't help, and taken to ICU.He continued to deteriorate so the decision was taken to turn the machines off and he died a few days later." Carolyn Murdoch said her dad John Connelly, 104, caught Covid in his care home "despite the government promising to throw a safety ring around them", and his loved ones were not allowed to be with him as he died in Glasgow Royal Infirmary. Loving She added: "Myself and the rest of the family have been left heartbroken by the circumstances of his death.We were unable to support or comfort each other as we grieved him. "He was a kind, loving family man and was known affectionately as our 'Legend'. "I hope the inquiry's findings ensure that the same mistakes don't happen again." Lady Hallett pledged those who suffered in the pandemic will "always be at the heart of the inquiry". Proceedings are expected to last three years. OPINION: PAGE 12 Graphic    Tragic toll... bereaved families outside inquiryPicture: LUCY NORTH/PA Load-Date: June 14, 2023  End of Document
