   Brexit 'may hinder war on drink and drugs' Daily Post (North Wales) June 15, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 321 words Body   A NEW report has raised concerns over the impact Brexit is having on the trade of illegal drugs, alcohol and tobacco in Wales. The report warns that urgent attention is needed to prevent any increase in adverse health affects in Wales. The report, from Public Health Wales (PHW), highlights that there are three main ways that Brexit is potentially impacting the trade of illegal drugs, alcohol and tobacco in Wales. The report stresses that Wales is particularly vulnerable to negative health outcomes, including death, from the use of these illicit products - and deaths as a result of illicit drugs are now at their highest levels since records began in 1993. Alcohol deaths are also high and smoking remains the leading cause of preventable death in Wales. The report states that the use of illegal alcohol and tobacco adds to the problems already caused by the legal use of these products. The following are the main ways that PHW says Brexit has affected international collaboration to tackle illicit trade: ¦ Data and information sharing: The UK does not have the same access to several EU databases for identifying criminals and illicit activity across Europe as it did before Brexit, potentially reducing its ability to detect and prevent illicit trade in the UK and Wales. ¦ Border and import controls: Now that the UK sits outside of the EU, it no longer participates in the Single Market or Customs Union. PHW says this could be advantageous for tackling illicit trade if goods are subject to additional checks at UK borders. However, new international trade agreements and proposals for freeports in the UK and Wales may create new opportunities that criminals will seek to exploit to smuggle illicit goods into Wales and the UK. ¦ Supply and demand: Post-Brexit, the UK is negotiating new international trade agreements, which have the potential to create new supply routes and opportunities for criminal exploitation. Load-Date: June 15, 2023  End of Document
