   Brexit grifters back to deny climate change Mail on Sunday (London) August 5, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; OPINION, COLUMNS; Pg. 15 Length: 492 words Byline: MATT COOPER Body   BRITAIN has been so busy with Brexit in recent years that its leading politicians have ignored other elements of the 'culture wars' that have so divided the United States. Thankfully, it meant that a consensus has held among the UK political parties about the need to combat the effects of global warming, something much in line with our position here in Ireland. That common ground is now beginning to erode, however, and some of the grifters who were so prominent during the Brexit obnoxiousness are now coming to the fore in this new front of seeking to sow division. Former whiskey salesman David Frost was one of Boris Johnson's main Brexit enablers. He is now vocal in denying climate change - and disputing the need to take measures to mitigate against further damage. Recently he has flown the false flag of saying more people die from cold than heat each year and that, therefore, rising temperatures should be seen as a good thing. Tell that to the people who don't have access to air conditioning, or who must work outdoors in sweltering conditions, or the families of those who have died because of heatwaves. This glib, facile and misleading statement is typical of the way science can be undermined by misdirection: in fact, rising temperatures in some parts of the world aren't going to make it any easier for people inhabiting the coldest parts of this planet. Mr Frost has also railed recently against public transport. He said that 'in poorer countries people depend on public transport and bikes. When they get richer they want cars because they bring freedom. Public transport will never be good enough for a free people to move around on.' How American to associate cars with freedom, to denigrate public transport as for 'the poor', as Margaret Thatcher once did, saying a man in his 30s on the bus was a failure in life. While it's true that we will never be able to provide public transport for everyone, especially in rural Ireland, it is to everyone's benefit that as many people as possible use buses, trains and bikes to get around cities, and between them. It's common sense as much as anything else? and that will continue to apply even after cars go electric. This is why it's sad to see that Rishi Sunak, the British prime minister, is pretending that his decision to allow hundreds of licences for drilling for oil and gas in the North Sea will not affect the UK's commitment to reach net zero emissions by 2050. He said exploited finds will simply replace imported oil and gas which come from long distances. This is somewhat disingenuous in that the UK imports very little oil and gas at present. In other words, Mr Sunak is gaslighting his own electorate, attempting to shore up Tory support by creating the impression that climate change initiatives are 'woke' and deliberately damaging to standards of living. It's the type of noise that might have some resonance in Ireland in a way that Brexit didn't. It's another risk we run. Load-Date: October 27, 2023  End of Document
