   British homeowners in France urge MPs to relax visa rules thetimes.co.uk November 15, 2023 Wednesday 12:01 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 795 words Byline: Andrew Ellson, Adam Sage Highlight: Britons write to députés urging them to back a plan to grant automatic long-stay Body   Hundreds of Britons who own homes in France are writing to members of the French parliament imploring them to support a change in the law to allow them to stay in the country for longer than 90 days at a time. Following the Brexit vote, Britons in France have seen their freedom of movement curtailed to three months in any six-month period. The rules mean the estimated 60,000 Britons who own a property in the country are unable to live at their French homes for extended periods, such as during the winter when many prefer to get away from the British winter. However, there is now hope on the horizon that  the strict rules  might be relaxed and the expat community is mobilising to make sure they are. Earlier this week, the French Senate, the equivalent to the House of Lords,  agreed to amend the law  to allow British second homeowners the automatic right to a long-stay visa. The amendment was tabled by Martine Berthet, a senator representing the Savoie area in the Alps, who said British property owners had been “punished by Brexit”. However, the new rules still need to be agreed by France’s National Assembly, the equivalent of the House of Commons. The French government has already indicated it will not support it because Britons can already apply for a long-stay visa. To counter this, British homeowners are writing to members of the National Assembly, known as députés, to explain the problems they encounter under the existing system. The letters are being co-ordinated from a Facebook group called France Visa Free, which has attracted thousands of members. Judy Evans, who owns a house boat moored in Auxerre, Burgundy, has written to her local député, Daniel Grenon. She wrote: “It has been suggested that the clause is not necessary because UK tourists have the option [of a long-stay visa] . In reality, however, the present system remains a major obstacle to allowing us to use our residences in France as we have been able to before. “The procedures for obtaining the extended visa are long, complicated and expensive. The entire process has to be undertaken afresh each year, as it is not possible to renew the visa. One has to apply and submit all the documentation that is required annually.” She added: “In contrast to the current travel limitations on a UK visitor to France, a French citizen can still visit the UK for up to six months each year without the need for a visa at all.” British homeowners who purchased their French homes before the Brexit referendum feel particularly let down. David Ward, who is renovating a house in the Creuse area of central France, said: “My whole future life was based on living in Creuse and I have been in limbo since the referendum result and Brexit.” The number of Britons who own properties in France  has been steadily falling  in recent years — at least in part because of the restrictions on visiting the country. As recently as 2013, more than 93,000 people from the UK owned a property in the country but last year this had dropped to 60,000, according to The English Housing Survey. Joanna Leggett, head of the French estate agent Leggett Immobilier, said: “Brexit, and the subsequent difficulty in travelling and moving to France certainly affected sales to British buyers. Up to 2020, Brits were always the largest overseas buyers of French property with around 30-35 per cent of the international market but are now in second place behind Belgian buyers with around 17 per cent of the market. So, it is fair to say that a relaxation in rules would definitely boost British sales, perhaps even doubling them from their current levels.” Fabien Genet, a senator who is a member of the Senate’s France-UK friendship committee, said: “Given our very particular relations with the UK, which was a member of the EU for years, and the very particular relations we have with the very many Britons with second homes in France, it seemed to us that there should be a particular [visa] procedure for them.” The automatic delivery of long-stay visas for British second homeowners was a “sensible and pragmatic” solution, he added. Eric Bocquet, the former chairman of the France-UK friendship committee, agreed. “British second homeowners are very welcome in France. They are perfectly integrated and their presence is very positive.” However, many of the Britons who have written to French députés have already received mixed reactions. Grenon wrote back to Evans: “It is indeed regrettable that since 2021 the freedom of visit for British owners has been severely restricted by the European Union. I also take note of the difficulties in obtaining the long-stay visa. At this stage, however, I can’t say that I’ll be supporting Madame Berthet’s amendment, but I’ll get back to you once I’ve looked more closely at the bill.” Load-Date: November 14, 2023  End of Document
