   Carney blames Brexit for inflation; Former Bank of England boss says he was right about high prices and slow growth The Daily Telegraph (London) June 17, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 1 Length: 515 words Byline: Szu Ping Chan; Tim Wallace Body   MARK CARNEY has blamed stubbornly high inflation in Britain on Brexit, claiming he had warned the public that leaving the European Union would damage the economy. The former governor of the Bank of England said that he had been vindi cated after predicting Brexit would lead to higher prices, a weaker pound and slower growth. Branded the "architect of Project Fear", Mr Carney repeatedly claimed that the economic consequences of Brexit were all negative. He claimed unemployment would rise under anything except a "close" relationship with Brussels after Brexit. In an interview with The Daily Telegraph he said: "There's no joy in saying: well, 'we told you so' because people are having to live with that reality." In 2018, Mr Carney published a report with doom-laden predictions, including a no-deal scenario that triggered up to a 30 per cent drop in house prices and a recession more damaging than the financial crisis. Mr Carney, who led the Bank for seven years until 2020, said a series of "negative supply shocks" had disrupted the economy and led to an unexpected increase in costs. He said the single biggest energy shock since the 1970s, combined with a shrinking workforce and the impact of Brexit, had triggered a "unique" adjustment in the UK that he suggested could take years to unwind. "We laid out in advance of Brexit that this will be a negative supply shock for a period of time and the consequence of that will be a weaker pound, higher inflation and weaker growth. And the central bank will need to lean against that. Now that's exactly what's hap pened. It's happened in coincidence with other factors, but it is a unique aspect of the economic adjustment that's going on here." Mr Carney's intervention comes as the Government battles to halve inflation. However, food prices are rising at their fastest rate in 45 years, wage growth remains strong and stubborn inflation has triggered chaos in the mortgage market. Jeremy Hunt, the Chancellor, has said the UK has "no alternative" but to raise interest rates to keep a lid on price rises. Describing Brexiteers as "a group of people who portrayed it as being something that was going to be seamless and positive and driving growth", he said these views contrasted with those of the Bank and other "technocrats" who "based on analysis were sceptical of that". He said the negative outcomes had "proven to be the case". Most economists say the UK's reli ance on energy imports combined with a tight jobs market has been the main driver of stubbornly high inflation Sir Jacob Rees-Mogg described Mr Carney's criticisms of Brexit as "non sense". He said: "He uses dodgy figures, he is responsible for many of the fail ures of the Bank of England, he was a bad Governor... and presided over failures in forecasting and failures to begin the process of reversing quantitative easing when the economy was strong." Andrew Bailey, the current Governor, announced this week the Bank will carry out a review of its inflation forecasting errors, admitting it "is going to take a lot longer" to bring inflation down. Interview: Page 25 Load-Date: June 17, 2023  End of Document
