   Charles III's trip to France strengthens a relationship strained by Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English September 20, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1102 words Body   The brilliant Peter Ustinov came up with an ironic formulation not far from reality: "The French and the British are such good enemies that they cannot help being friends". Indeed, the close alliance between France and the United Kingdom, founding members of NATO, is not incompatible with tensions, misunderstandings and the occasional rant. The heavy digestion of Brexit generated strong turbulence between the two sides of the English Channel over the past few years. The three-day state visit that begins this Wednesday the King of England, Charles III, and Queen Camilla is intended to strengthen the relationship after the difficult period of Britain's departure from the European Union, further complicated by the histrionics and unpredictability of Boris Johnson as Prime Minister. The British sovereign's trip had to be postponed last March due to the violent demonstrations following the approval by decree of the controversial pension reform in France. The trip posed a security risk and a diplomatic nightmare. It was an embarrassing situation for Macron and for the high self-esteem of his fellow citizens. Charles III had opted for Paris as his first destination after succeeding his mother. The King of England kept, however, his planned visit to Berlin. A double setback for French pride. The March resignation was painful because the presence of Charles III at the Elysée would have been the festive corollary of the summit that the two governments had held, the first since 2018, during which important agreements on migration control were signed. The Paris meeting showed the new working atmosphere, much more efficient and pragmatic, imposed with the arrival of Rishi Sunak at 10 Downing Street. It was inevitable that Brexit, an already very complex and chaotically negotiated process, would cause problems between Paris and London. One of the most visible was the fishing dispute, with a never-ending tug-of-war over issues such as scallop fishing grounds or the historical rights of the French to fish in waters such as those surrounding the Channel Island of Jersey. Another point of disagreement has been the traffic of small boats - the British call them small boats - between the French and UK coasts. The irony of the story is that, after Brexit, which was voted precisely to better control the flow of migrants, Britain still receives more. An additional reason for bilateral acrimony was the strong French anger over the surprising announcement, in the fall of 2021, of a Pacific alliance, the Aukus, between Australia, Britain and the United States, to stop the feet of Chinese expansionism. Paris, which holds territories in the Pacific and the Indian Ocean, felt marginalized. Another humiliation was that Australia rescinded the contract to equip itself with French submarines and signed an alternative agreement with the Americans and the British. Gradually the Franco-British waters have calmed down. Paris has "retaliated" with tangible deeds. Brexit has weakened London as a financial center, especially to the benefit of the French capital, which is also stealing investments from it. The King of England had to postpone his visit last March because of the riots. It is only logical that pomp and circumstance should accompany Charles and Camilla's visit. The United Kingdom is the democratic monarchy par excellence. And France is the most monarchical of republics. April 8 next year will mark the 120th anniversary of the signing of the entente cordiale agreement between the two countries and June 6 will mark the eightieth anniversary of the Allied landing on the Norman beaches during World War II. The stay of the British sovereigns will be marked by symbolic gestures. The last time Elizabeth II was on French territory was in 2014, on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of D-Day. She was already 88 years old. Macron and his wife Brigitte will welcome Charles and Camilla at the Arc de Triomphe, to pay tribute to the tomb of the unknown soldier. Then the retinue, with gala escort on horseback, will descend the Champs Elysees to the presidential palace. In the evening, a state dinner, with between 150 and 180 guests, in the emblematic Hall of Mirrors, in the Palace of Versailles, a very monarchical detail that angers critics of Macron. But protocol could not forget that, in 1972, the same treatment was reserved for Elizabeth II. Thursday's program is tight. Charles III will deliver a speech at the Senate, while Brigitte and Camilla will launch a Franco-British literary prize at the imposing Richelieu - the historic - headquarters of the National Library of France. There will also be visits to the works of Notre Dame, the National Museum of Natural History and the suburb of Saint-Denis, where key venues of the 2024 Olympic Games will be located. The King and Queen of England will spend Friday in Bordeaux, a city that hosts a large British colony. There will be meetings with military of the two countries, a tribute to firefighters who fought forest fires in the region last year and a visit to some organic vineyards, one of the weaknesses of Charles, an environmentalist of the first hour. According to sources in the Elysée, Macron and Charles III are linked by "ties of friendship and trust". They have already met on several occasions. They share views on issues such as climate and the defense of biodiversity, which they will discuss. The president and the king will, of course, also discuss international issues such as the situation in Africa and the war in Ukraine. No logistical details have been provided for security reasons. The figure of 8,000 agents mobilized, in total, for the Paris and Bordeaux stages is unofficially being bandied about. There are no specific threats, but the French police prefer to minimize the risks. According to the Elysée, French is likely to be the main language at the meetings between Charles III and Macron. "We know that the king is perfectly French-speaking," recalled, not without satisfaction, a source in the presidential palace. Fishing and irregular migration across the English Channel have created bilateral disputes It was curious, if surely due to pure coincidence, that, as the appetizer to the royal visit, Macron received yesterday at the Elysee the Labour leader and head of the British opposition, MP Keir Starmer. "Their meeting is in the context of the dialogue that the President of the Republic maintains with political actors," recalled from the President's entourage. And, in order to avoid suspicions, it was clarified that Macron met Sunak on the sidelines of the recent G-20 summit in India. Load-Date: September 21, 2023  End of Document
