   Cheesemakers seek new markets after challenges posed by Brexit; Cheesemakers have been hit hard by the increase in red tape and costs when trying to export to Europe since Brexit. Lewis Clarke met some West Country producers to find out how they are meeting the new challenges We are an island with 60 million people within 24 hours' drive, and we've got a massive market here without having to be too concerned about the European market PHILLIP STANSFIELD Western Daily Press June 10, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 20,21 Length: 1271 words Byline: Lewis Clarke Body   THE region's cheese producers, who are facing new challenges exporting to Europe, have urged UK customers to back them by enjoying their products. Cheesemakers and dairy firms are among the British businesses that have been hard hit by additional Brexit-related costs and bureaucracy. Recent reports suggest some UK cheesemakers risk being cut out of the EU market and even going bust if the Government does not secure improvements to the Brexit deal. Speaking to iNews last week, Andrew Kuyk, senior policy adviser at the Provision Trade Federation (PTF), said: ""here is a whole raft of paperwork that did not exist before Brexit that in itself is adding to cost and complexity." Dairy firms trading their products with the EU are required to complete export health certificates that can cost around £200-£300 per load. Mr Kuyk said: "People have built that into their pricing structure and they've also had to build in extra delay. "Some customers have said that's not good enough, and they've gone elsewhere, and that's partly why [export] trade has shrunk." Cheese was one of the highlights at this year's Royal Bath & West Show, and the Western Daily Press spoke to those attending the spectacle to see how they were faring. PHILLIP STANSFIELD, managing director of The Cornish Cheese Company, based in Launceston, Cornwall, said: "It's excellent to be here today. We've done this show 20 years and it's nice to see a cheese marquee back. "Having an artisan cheese marquee is a big thing for cheesemakers to show of f their wear to the public." "  On trading with European Union nations following Brexit, he said: "It is dfficult with all the bureaucracy and the paperwork to get our cheese where we used to. "We've got an international cheese fair in Italy every other year. It hasn't happened since Covid, but it won't be easy for us to get cheese out there now. "You've got extra taxes to take cheese over there; you've got additional paperwork; you've got to have veterinary certificates and export certificates. It's just a mountain of paperwork for quite a simple thing. He called for the Government to "sort something out" but also called on the EU to be more proactive. He said: "It seems as though Europe is trying to block us rather than accept us. They're obviously a little bit miffed that we've pulled out of the European Union, and they're trying to make it as difficult as possible for us to get cheese out there. ""he Government needs to sort it out because it works both ways. I still see a lot of French brie come into this country at a very low price, and they seem to get it here very easily. I think we should be able to get it across there a lot easier." "  On the future for British cheesemakers, he added: "I'm pretty cofident because I'm a cheesemaker. We're investing all the time to expand. "We are an island with 60 million people within 24 hours' drive, and we've got a massive market here without having to be too concerned about the European market. "What we need is exhibitions like this where we can educate the public as to what British cheeses there are out there. "My message to visitors and people is to enjoy British artisan cheese. There are some great flavours here, some lovely different cheeses, and educate yourself, ask questions and learn more about British artisan cheese." "  Rachel Cooper, wholesale and retailer for Batch Farm Cheesemakers based near Shepton Mallet, said that people were now looking for value for money, which they ofered. She explained: "We have to price it right, but we've got a huge range and it seems very popular because we offer a reasonable deal." On the challenges facing cheesemakers after Brexit, she said: "We're working with a customer overseas. We export to Australia currently, and people are interested in Europe but we are finding it very costly to do the paperwork involved due to Brexit. "Additional paperwork and the checks that are going on are costly and time-consuming. We used to export a lot to Ireland but the costs involved now mean it's not worth us doing [that]. "Because of this, the number of online orders has reduced because we used to dispatch a lot to Ireland. Orders have dropped and the overseas delivery cost has increased hugely. "It is a concern within the industry, although we've made sure that we've evolved. We're a small, familyrun business that's all hand-produced, and we are very niche. "However, we can't compete with the mass producers, but the customers seem to like our products and are willing to support us, which is great." Despite the challenges, she said the Government had provided support through the tough times. She said: "I have to say, to be fair to them, we have had support for the EU. They know it's a challenge and they have gone out of their way to try and make contact and support us." She said that the UK market remained busy but that Covid-19 had taken its toll, adding: "A lot of our sales used to be deli. "We used to sell quarters to be sold on the deli. It's trying to re-educate people that that's safe and a good way to buy cheese, as everybody wants everything packaged or wrapped in wax. That's costly for the environment, which is a real shame because we used to be able to cut and put in wax paper and save the environment." Simon O'Brien, from Barbers Farm Cheese, based in Ditcheat, said they are the world's oldest family of cheddar makers. He said: ""he Bath and West show has been fantastic, sales have been buoyant, and everyone loves the chance to try our cheeses. "At the moment, cheese making is going well. The milk is fantastic. It comes from 157 farms within the 30-mile radius of our farm and the dairy in Ditcheat. But obviously, we've had a bit of price variation at the moment. "We are more towards the premium end of cheese making and, you can see here today, plenty of people are trying it, plenty of people buying, so hopefully they're coming out and spoiling themselves." He said the business exports to Europe but concentrated more on America, the Far East, and their fastest-growing marketplace, Australia. He said: "We're exporting a little bit further and traditionally always have. "We've always had to do the paperwork because we're beyond Europe. We've got a team of people in place to do the paperwork, whereas we've probably only had one person doing it a couple of times a week. There's a more logistical nightmare since Brexit to get things out and about." On exporting to Europe, he added: "I think it could be made easier. It could be slicker as it's a paperwork nightmare that can lead to cheeses and chilled foods stuck at ports everywhere." He said that the company was in its 191st year and had the seventh generation of the family now working at the business. "We're all hopeful that it's in good shape for the next generation," he added. Alison Hughes, of Godminster Cheese in Bruton, said that times were challenging. On the cost of living and Brexit, she said: "Last year was brilliant as people just wanted to get out, enjoy themselves and taste cheese. This year it's tougher, but we are looking to get into the American market, so we are pushing the boundaries. "We chose the American market because they don't have great cheddar and are missing out. "It's really exciting for the team who have been going to lots of trade shows this year, and we know the Americans will love our cheddar." On trading with European nations, she added: "We have an online distribution service so that we can deliver globally. "I'm not personally involved in the export side of the business, but there are the challenges in the new rules, distribution and everything else, but we're finding ways." Graphic    > Debbie Fewell, BeckLee and Cally Fewell oWyke Farm cheese at thRoyal Bath and West ShoLewis Clarke> PHILLIP STANSFIELD, managing director of The Cornish Cheese Company, says since Brexit it is difficult with all the bureaucracy and the paperwork to get their cheese where they used to Lewis Clarke Load-Date: June 10, 2023  End of Document
