   Citi Europe boss: London hardly hurt by Brexit City A.M. July 18, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 City A.M. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 362 words Byline: CHRIS DORRELL Body   CITIGROUP's European head has said Brexit has not impacted the City anywhere near as much as experts predicted. In an interview with The Daily Telegraph, David Livingstone, Citi's Europe, Middle East and Africa boss, said the City has "not been diminished" by Brexit, despite attempts by the EU to attract more firms to the bloc. Livingstone highlighted a range of factors that made the City an attractive place to do business, including its language and strong legal traditions. "For me, it's an absolute certainty that the UK will remain with those characteristics and therefore remain the place that we have our headquarters," he said. Many experts warned that Brexit would damage the standing of the City, with some predicting that thousands of jobs would move out of London. But Livingstone said Citi has only shifted "a few hundred roles" out of the City, mainly due to regulatory requirements. While the EU has been attempting to boost its capital markets since the UK left the bloc, by bringing together the various domestic markets into one market, Liv- ingstone suggested it still had much work to do. "The EU post-Brexit has got a lot to build in terms of the depth of its capital markets. It's got a banking union and a capital markets union, both of which are not progressing as fast in terms of delivering an outcome as a place where corporate clients and institutional clients can raise capital and do it in a seamless way within the union," he said. Despite this, he said it was still important that regulators and legislators made steps to boost the City's competitiveness. "I still think it is important that the UK focuses on its competitiveness and not rest on the laurels of those characteristics, which are evidently permanent but [require the right regulatory] settings." Under the Financial Services and Markets Act, the financial regulators will have to consider competitiveness when making regulatory decisions. A slew of regulatory reforms focusing on capital markets have also been announced in recent weeks, including streamlining the listings regime, scrapping EU rules on investment research and moves to ensure pension funds invest more in UK companies. Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
