   Citroen's warning should be a Brexit wake-up call Birmingham Post June 1, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 20 Length: 823 words Byline: Alex de Ruyter Body   T HE recent warning by Citroën's owner Stellantis and other automakers that they could abandon UK production of electric vehicles due to Brexit red tape if the government doesn't try to renegotiate the 2020 Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) it signed with the EU, should serve as a wake-up call that Brexit isn't working. And it cannot be made to work given the trade barriers it has thrown up. The specific cause for concern is the TCA contains 'rules of origin' provisions which require carmakers to prove at least 40 per cent of an EV's parts (value of) originate from within the UK or EU. This is in order to avoid a ten per cent tariff on a complete vehicle which would render UK exports to the EU uncompetitive (most cars made in the UK are exported, primarily to the EU). Next year this will go up to 45 per cent and then 55 per cent by 2027. Carmakers have long argued the current 40 per cent threshold is difficult to satisfy as batteries make up a significant chunk of the value of an EV - as much as 50 per cent - and battery production is dominated by Chinese and Korean firms. As most batteries are imported from China, carmakers say that, as the rules of origin thresholds rise, meeting their strictures will become increasingly impossible. And it is this dependency on China, with its attendant security concerns, that has catalysed efforts by the EU and the US to develop battery production within their own borders. Had the UK remained in the EU as part of the single market, it would have had more clout at a Europewide negotiating table and funding pot to secure Brexit production. Now outside the EU, the UK government's assistance to carmakers has been risible, compared to its American and European counterparts. It is all very well for Sir Keir Starmer to say that Labour "wants a closer working relationship" with the EU but continuing to rule out single market membership means the onus is on him to spell out exactly what this would be - a Swiss-style approach of sector-specific bilateral agreements? The EU would be unlikely to agree, given the complexity they entail, and the UK is a much bigger economy than Switzerland. While Labour, perhaps understandably, is keen to avoid being pinned down on its Brexit stance, it will come under increasing pressure to do so in the lead-up to a general election. With polling evidence suggesting voters increasingly see Brexit as a mistake and Labour's predicted vote would actually increase were they to do so, I would suggest it's time to bite the bullet The UK danger of in terms production, and make the case for re-joining the single market. high energy compared rivals More generally, the UK is in real danger of falling behind in terms of EV production, given its high energy costs compared to EU rivals and lack of capacity in the EV supply chain. There is also the lack of a placebased industry policy recognising the importance of original equipment manufacturers in the automotive "ecosystem" and the role of firms such as Jaguar Land Rover as anchor employers in the geographic areas they operate within. So, there is a real impetus for the UK government to provide direct significant financial support to firms such as JLR, which are national strategic assets, due to the R&D they undertake and potential to boost productivity and skilled employment. in real falling behind of EV given its costs to EU With the US and EU throwing billions at EV production, particularly battery production, anything less than substantial assistance from the UK government will most likely see production shift to the US and Europe. JLR chief executive Adrian Mardell has alluded to as much, commenting the UK could miss out on battery production if it had a "cost disadvantage" relative to other countries. With reports suggesting JLR's owner Tata is now deciding between Somerset and Spain to build a gigafactory, the fact Spain is in the single market and the Spanish government has offered £304 million in subsidies could be a deciding factor. As could the fact JLR currently produces the electric I-Pace in Austria and there is the prospect of adding EV production at its Nitra plant in Slovakia. As such, re-joining the single market would be a significant shot in the arm to restoring the desirability of the UK as a place to invest in. While the possibility of a gigafactory in Somerset is a blow to the West Midlands, battery production in the UK is essential if we are to preserve the viability of the auto industry here and JLR has expressed a commitment to vehicle production in the region. All the more reason for the UK government and opposition to finally seriously address the problems Brexit has thrown up. Alex de Ruyter is a political economist and automotive supply chain researcher at Birmingham evidence Brexit  firms such national to the  The UK is in real danger of falling behind in terms of EV production, given its high energy costs compared to EU rivals  from will most Graphic    Production of EVs in the UK could be abandoned due to Brexit red tape, Citroen has warned Load-Date: June 1, 2023  End of Document
