   Conservatives take aim at Labour leader over talks with Macron; Élysée Palace visit Financial Times (London, England) September 19, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 468 words Byline: GEORGE PARKER; LEILA ABBOUD;ANDREW EDGECLIFFE-JOHNSON Body   Emmanuel Macron, the French president, will meet Sir Keir Starmer in Paris today as the Labour leader faces claims he is looking to take Britain "back to square one on Brexit". Starmer told the Financial Times this weekend that he would seek to get "a much better deal" on Brexit if he won the next election, including seeking a "closer trading relationship" by revisiting the post-Brexit UK/EU trade pact. Post-Brexit relations will be raised by Starmer in what will be his first meeting with Macron, but the Conservatives claimed the Labour leader would "reopen the arguments of the past". "Seven years on from the referendum, Keir Starmer wants to take Britain back to square one on Brexit, reopening the arguments of the past all over again," the Tory party said. James Cleverly, foreign secretary, said at the UN in New York some in the EU thought Starmer was "delusional". He said: "I think there's very little I can add to that." Starmer's visit to the Élysée Palace marks the culmination of a week in which he has tried to introduce himself on to the world stage as a prime minister-in-waiting, including promising to repair EU relations. Tories believe Starmer has made a strategic mistake by starting to talk openly about trying to improve the "far too thin" trade deal struck by Boris Johnson after Brexit. Lord Peter Ricketts, former UK ambassador to France, said Macron would be trying to work out the extent to which he could work with Starmer, who campaigned for Remain in the 2016 referendum on EU membership. "Politicians are generally interested in other politicians who are on the rise," he said. "But I don't think France or Germany are looking for a big leap forward on UK/EU relations. They have lots of other things on their plate." Starmer said an "implementation review" of Johnson's Trade and Cooperation Agreement with the EU planned from the end of 2025 was an "important" moment, but Ricketts said at the moment Brussels saw it as more of a technical exercise. Elysée officials have been careful to cast the meeting as a normal part of the French president's diplomatic calendar, which periodically sees him meet opposition leaders from other countries. There will be no joint press conference. Relations between Britain and France have improved in the year since Rishi Sunak became prime minister from the lows they plumbed under Johnson, who was seen by Paris as an unreliable partner. With negotiations over the post-Brexit relationship between the UK and the EU now settled, the source of much tension between the two has abated, although the issue of cross-Channel illegal migration has remained difficult. Georgina Wright at Paris-based thinktank Institut Montaigne said Macron would probably be in listening mode. "France and the rest of the EU don't really know what Labour wants to do." Load-Date: September 18, 2023  End of Document
