   Covid and Brexit blamed as company goes under; K9 MOBILE SECURITY LEAVES DEBTS OF ALMOST £250K The Plymouth Herald September 4, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 5 Length: 567 words Byline: William telford Body   A PLYMOUTH security company has gone bust with unpaid debts of nearly £250,000 after seeing its clients hit by Covid and Brexit. K9 Mobile Security was set up in 2009 and traded successfully for years until key customers started going out of business as the economy worsened. The Plympton-based enterprise saw its income tumble as companies, suffering from the impact of the pandemic and the UK leaving the EU, cancelled contracts. It was also faced with a huge tax bill which, despite attempts to restructure, turned out to be the final nail. Business owner Jon Bennett made a valiant attempt to keep the business trading but eventually had to sell up what assets it had and call in liquidators. The company was wound up voluntarily in August. Documents filed at Companies House show assets worth £17,294 can be realised which will go towards paying off the tax bill. But HM Revenue and Customs is still likely to be more than £145,000 out of pocket. Lloyds Bank Plc is unlikely to receive the £54,000 it is claiming, and London-based business financier Capital on Tap will be left without the £36,000 it is seeking. In total, it is estimated that unpaid debts will hit £241,000. K9 Mobile Security Ltd, which traded from premises in Valley Road, provided specialist security guarding services throughout Devon and Cornwall. It only employed fully- trained SIA licensed staff and clients included large companies, housing associations and councils. Mr Bennett told The Herald: "The company grew over the years securing many large contracts, including the security for building contractors and high-rise flats with the same cladding as identified in the Grenfell Tower." But he said: "Difficulties started during Covid, at which point turnover had reduced due to the high-rise flat contract ending. In addition, the company lost some large contracts due to customers ceasing to trade due to their own financial difficulties. Covid and Brexit had a large impact on the industries serviced by the company." Mr Bennett said that due to K9 turnover falling it struggled to meet the high tax bills from previously highly profitable periods. As recently as January 2022, K9's accounts showed a surplus on the balance sheet. But Mr Bennett said: "Some customers tightened their belts, some cancelled services. This had a knock-on effect on the company's cash flow/ revenue. Covid and large impact industries the Business Jon "I attempted to reduce outgoings by cancelling anything the company didn't need, but it was not enough. I initially agreed to a payment plan with HMRC, but this monthly payment was too much to sustain, leaving the company dipping into credit cards every month. Brexit had a on the serviced by company. "I sought professional advice in December 2022 and hoped that the company could trade out of its difficulties due to being profitable. However, the arrangement with HMRC was unaffordable. "It became apparent in July 2023 that it was not viable to keep the company trading and therefore further advice was sought which resulted in the trade and assets being sold for market value and liquidation of the company." owner Bennett December that the trade  on the balance Bennett customers  a  Covid and Brexit had a large impact on the industries serviced by the company. Business owner Jon Bennett  to by anything the need, but it I initially agreed to   company. therefore was sought the trade and assets Graphic    K9 Mobile Security was based at Valley Road, in Plympton Load-Date: September 4, 2023  End of Document
