   Despite Brexit we have to align with Europe - isolation is dangerous Manchester Evening News July 15, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 16,17 Length: 314 words Body   THE DIFFICULTIES of the present Conservative government have helped undermine the party's chief selling-point at the last election - Brexit. The M.E.N. article 'Seven Years On From The Vote' highlighted the swing towards Europe, or at least away from faith in Brexit. Looking at the statistics, many more thousands of those who voted for Brexit have died than of those who voted against it. The age disparity is likely to increase as six in ten 18-24 year-olds would vote to re-join Europe. This is not surprising as Brexit cost them the all-Europe Erasmus scheme and limited work mobility. Science has suffered. Brexit locked us out of Horizon, the European Research Programme. Now Britain is trying to negotiate a return. Intellectual progress is not made in isolation. If the Prime Minister wants Britain to become a science super power, it will have to be as part of a conglomerate. Other parts of national life have suffered too. Yet again there have been appeals to lift restrictions on foreign care workers. Agriculture and hospitality are permanently www.understaffed.No wonder prominent Conservatives are making their voices heard. On the front page of 'i', Tobias Ellwood MP, who voted to remain in 2016, has made his views clear. 'Tory urges rethink on Single Market'. In the Observer George Eustice MP, a long term Brexiter, delivers a similar message. 'Re-open UK borders to EU workers'. True, the Express has warned to 'start talking up the benefits of Brexit', but it has not stated what these are. A quick clean return is impossible. Both Britain and the EU have changed. But we have to repair the bridges or face poverty and insignificance. Europe must pull together. The Russian invasion of Ukraine and the unreliability of America should drive this reality home. We have to align and cooperate. In an increasingly dangerous world isolation is dangerous. Margaret Brown, Burslem Graphic    Moors Murders victim Pauline ReadeThis week's Big picture is: Moorings and the Viaduct in Castlefield in Manchester by Norman Wall Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
