   Don't be fooled by Sir Keir's Brexit betrayal; Daily Mail COMMENT Mail on Sunday (London) September 19, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14 Length: 388 words Body   WHEN Keir Starmer claimed that he would not try to unpick Brexit if he became prime minister, this paper warned his words should be taken with a large pinch of salt. Despite solemnly promising to respect the referendum result, he was at the forefront of the parliamentary chicanery to overturn it, led the disgraceful 'People's Vote' campaign and plotted with European Union chiefs to foil our departure completely. So how sincere was the Labour leader when he vowed not to drag the UK back into the ambit of Brussels? The answer, we learn unsurprisingly, is: 'Not very.' Sir Keir glibly speaks about negotiating a 'much better' deal, based on a 'closer trading relationship', if he wins power. Best of luck with that! We know from the excruciating days of the Brexit talks that the EU is institutionally incapable of being reasonable. And, true to form, Sir Keir is squirmingly evasive about which of our sovereign rights he'd be ready to sacrifice. But no one should be under any illusion… Brussels never gives without taking more, usually much more, in return. Of course, Sir Keir insists Labour would not rejoin the single market and customs union. But can this evangelic Remainer really be trusted to stand up for democracy on behalf of 17.4million Leavers? Or would he heed the Europhile ultras, Whitehall 'Blob' and big business clamouring for Britain to go back to shadowing the EU's rules and regulations, as a prelude to full realignment? Only the most credulous amongst us could think the former. While the Government has seemed depressingly reluctant to properly embrace it, Brexit has not been the economic disaster Sir Keir and his stooges gleefully claim. Free from Brussels interference, we have signed exciting trade deals with some of the world's most dynamic and fastest growing economies. Inward investment is booming. Britain has, so far, avoided a slump. By contrast, the Eurozone teeters on the brink of recession. Germany, once its engine room, is on its knees. Far-Right parties are on the rise. The supposedly mighty Brussels project Remainers revere is imploding. Yet Labour, dogmatically, is determined to tie its growth strategy more closely to a stagnating continent. Sir Keir either thinks pro-Leavers are too stupid to notice this betrayal of Brexit - or so disillusioned with the Tories they no longer care. Load-Date: September 19, 2023  End of Document
