   DREAD AND BREAKFAST; Seven years ago the Tories led Scotland into a Brexit referendum that ultimately dragged us, against our will, out of Europe. This week we look at the catastrophic impact on our industries and services. Today, the staffing crisis faced by the hospitality industry Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 21, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 14,15 Length: 971 words Byline: DAN VEVERS; CHRIS McCALL Body   SCOTLAND'S tourism industry has been devastated by Brexit after warnings it would hit the sector hard were ignored. As part of the Daily Record's Broken Brexit series, we spoke to struggling hospitality and tourism firms around Scotland - and they are convinced that Brexit has been a disaster for them. They told how Scotland urgently needs a better-managed migration system to encourage European workers back here to work in hotels, restaurants and bars. One island hotelier said the sector "hadn't been listened to" over concerns about the disruption caused by leaving the EU. Business bosses also spoke of a loss of "cultural diversity" from workforces as the number of EU nationals coming here to study or work fell as a result of the loss of freedom of movement. They say the Tories' hard Brexit sparked a crisis in hospitality and tourism - two key Scottish industries - by making it much harder to recruit and retain high-quality staff. ATTRACTION on Skye. Tourists but firms there Anne Gracie, director of the Sonas Hotel Collection on the Isle of Skye, said their recovery from the Covid lockdown had been hit hard by a slowdown in the flow of workers to Scotland. She added: "It has had a significant negative impact on the hospitality sector. It is now much more difficult to recruit the number of team members required each season. "The majority of our team members stay with us all year on permanent contracts. However, the busy summer season requires additional positions to match the business volume. "The number of applicants, and often the quality of the applications, has reduced, making it more challenging to find the right people for the positions available. "The number of vacancies available means you have to compete to attract the right people to the vacancies." Gracie continued: "Prior to Brexit, we would recruit three or four people per hotel directly from other European countries to supplement our year-round team. "These tended to be university students or people early in their careers who wanted to travel, live in a different country, improve their English and gain experience in a good-quality hotel to take into their future careers. The Fairy Pools flock to the island staffing issues "This added a rich cultural diversity to the team. They enjoyed getting to know each other, made friendships and often travelled together to their home countries." Since Brexit, sectors such as hospitality - which have historically relied on workers from eastern Europe and other parts of the EU to fill posts - have been hit hard. Stringent visa requirements to come to the UK as a skilled worker - including meeting strict salary thresholds - mean numbers coming to Britain from the EU have fallen from hundreds of thousands to tens of thousands a year. It's believed more than 100,000 European citizens have left the UK hospitality sector since 2019. Employers can also sponsor people from overseas for work under the UK's Sponsorship Licence Scheme but it's an expensive, time-consuming and complicated process, costing thousands of pounds in fees. Last autumn, it was reported nearly four in 10 UK accommodation and food businesses are facing skilled worker shortages. As summer demand and tourism ramps up, that is being felt even more keenly in places like the Highlands and islands of Scotland. Last year, under former first minister Nicola Sturgeon, the SNP Government proposed a Scottish rural visa pilot scheme to allow people to be recruited from abroad even if they earn less than Home Office wage requirements. But immigration policy reserved to Westminster, Downing Street quickly quashed the plan. Asked if she was confident her hotels - which include beauty spot Skye's Toravaig House, Duisdale House and Skeabost House - would be able to recruit adequate numbers of staff, Gracie said recruitment had become "a fulltime job". She warned: "It is increasingly difficult to recruit into senior roles. People who are careerfocused hospitality professionals tend to gravitate towards businesses based in cities." She added: "Scot land's hospitality sector has not been listened to with respect to Brexit and the reduced diversity and skills within the workforce has also been detrimental. "There are not suf ficient numbers of potential recruits to fill all the vacancies in SCOTLAND'S. "We need to have a system where people can come here to work in hospitality or other sectors as we need services that support the population to function well also. "This could be for short-term, seasonal contracts but there should also be a route to recruit into permanent positions that is not fraught with the difficulties of the Sponsorship Licence Scheme ." Stephen Montgomery - head of the Scottish Hospitality Group and owner of Townhead Hotel, in Lockerbie, said: "Brexit had a crossover with Covid and many workers went home because of a mixture of both and have not returned. "Whether we like it or not, Brexit has happened. The longer we ponder on it, or cast political blame, the longer the problem will remain. Many businesses within the hospitality sector. have come up with fantastic ways of recruiting. "What we need to concentrate on is c on t in u in g to encourage people back into the workplace with better skills development, a good working environment and a positive outlook to the future." SNP Westminster economy spokesman Stewart Hosie said: "Ending freedom of movement. was a disastrous act of self-harm the UK inflicted upon itself. "As a result businesses in are struggling to fill vacancies as they no longer have the labour market to pull from that they used to have. The only way Scotland will be able to flourish is by becoming an independent country back in the EU." within the come of spokesman "Ending was self- TOMORROW How criminals have cashed in from the Brexit changes to be becoming country economy Graphic    a ATTRACTION Top, The Fairy Pools on Skye. Tourists flock to the island but firms there face staffing issuesHUGE IMPACT Anne Gracie, of Sonas Hotels Load-Date: June 21, 2023  End of Document
