   Electric car manufacturers' price warning if tariffs enforced in 2024 Belfast Telegraph October 16, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 333 words Byline: Adam Forrest Body   ELECTRIC cars will cost British motorists an extra £6,000 if Rishi Sunak fails to strike a post-Brexit deal with the EU on tariffs, industry bosses have www.said.UK manufacturers warned of a "devastating price war" on consumers - threatening the electric vehicle market and the UK's climate change commitments - if tariffs are enforced in January 2024. In the latest major Brexit row, the Government is pushing the European Commission to agree to delay the costly new rules set to come in at the start of next year as part of Boris Johnson's Brexit trade deal. But Brussels has shown no sign it is willing to budge, leaving business leaders in despair about the impact of 10% tariffs on exports on Britain's car industry. These would increase the price of a new Tesla Model Y - the UK's most popular electric vehicle - by £6,000 or more, according to a new report by the Independent Commission on UKEU Relations. "For the sake of our economy and our planet, the Government has a responsibility to get round the table with the EU, fix this and fix the raft of other issues with the Brexit deal," said commission director Mike Buckley. The new rules of origin agreed in the Brexit trade and cooperation agreement require 45% of an electric car's value to originate in the UK or EU to qualify for trade without tariffs. The British auto industry has warned the 2024 rules pose an "existential threat" to sales because of the lack of domestic batteries to meet the rules, pleading for a delay until 2027. The new report, backed by the manufacturers body MakeUK and British Chamber of Commerce, warns that the January tariffs will immediately push up costs and hit electric vehicle sales. Richard Rumbelow, MakeUK's director of international trade, said the "price cliff edge" looming for electric cars in January could be huge. The report also called on the Government to pursue a deal for the UK to remain part of the EU VAT area, so that companies do not have to pay the tax when importing goods. ©The Independent Graphic    Prime Minister Rishi Sunak Load-Date: October 16, 2023  End of Document
