   Electric cars 'to cost £6k more' if Sunak can't do deal with EU; UK's auto industry warns Johnson's agreement poses 'existential threat' Irish Independent October 16, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 20 Length: 533 words Byline: ADAM FORREST Body   Electric cars will cost UK motorists an extra £6,000 ((EURO)6,900) if Rishi Sunak fails to strike a post-Brexit deal with the EU on tariffs, industry bosses have told The www.Independent.UK manufacturers warned of "devastating price war" on consumers - threatening both the electric vehicle (EV) market and the UK's climate change commitments - if tariffs are enforced next January. In the latest major Brexit row, the Sunak government is pushing the European Commission to agree to delay the costly new rules set to come in at the start of next year as part of Boris Johnson's Brexit trade deal. But Brussels has shown no sign it is willing to budge - leaving UK business leaders in despair about the impact of 10pc tariffs on exports on the UK car industry. The tariffs would increase the price of a new Tesla Model Y - the UK's most popular electric vehicle - by £6,000 or more, according to a new report by the UK's Independent Commission on UKEU Relations, shared with The Independent. "For the sake of our economy and our planet, the government has a responsibility to get round the table with the EU, fix this and fix the raft of other issues with the Brexit deal," said commission director Mike Buckley. The new rules of origin agreed in the Brexit trade and co-operation agreement (TCA) require 45pc of an electric car's value to originate in the UK or EU to qualify for trade without tariffs. The UK auto industry has warned the 2024 rules pose an "existential threat" to sales because of the lack of domestic batteries to meet the rules - pleading for a delay until 2027. The VDA - the lobby group for Germany's car industry - has also called for an "urgent" move to delay, warning that the rules create a "significant competitive disadvantage" for European carmarkers in relation to China and other Asian competitors. The new report by the UK's Independent Commission on UK-EU Relations - backed by the manufacturers body MakeUK and British Chamber of Commerce - warns that the January tariffs will immediately push up costs and hit electric vehicle sales. Richard Rumbelow, MakeUK's director of international trade, said the "price cliff edge" looming for electric cars in January could be huge. "Households could soon be paying thousands more for electric vehicles. It would be a devastating price war on consumers." The trade expert added: "It's imperative that the government gets round the table with the EU and sorts this situation as soon as it can. Industry needs assurance that it won't be forced to make consumers pay even more, in these toughest of economic times." The trade commission, which examines the ongoing impacts of the Brexit trade deal, also warned that it could set back Mr Sunak's hopes of achieving net zero carbon emissions by 2050. The UK prime minister has already been accused of hurting the EV market by pushing back a ban on petrol and diesel car sales from 2030 to 2035. "That number of extra fossil fuel cars on the road would add over 807 billion grams of carbon to the atmosphere across the UK and EU. Given the UK is already on track to miss climate targets on nearly every front any further obstacle spells disaster," Mr Buckley said. (© Independent News Service) Load-Date: October 16, 2023  End of Document
