   Ending austerity; Letters East Anglian Daily Times September 26, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 30 Length: 333 words Body   I MUST confess to being a little perplexed. We were told that Brexit was all about gaining control of our borders and our sovereignty. Leaving the European Union (EU) was apparently going to enable us to achieve all this and, once more, we could pump the money we 'saved' into other services including the NHS and would not lose any of the protections and benefits we has members of the EU. In the words of our former prime minister we would "have our cake and eat it". So how has this turned out? The environmental protections we had as members of the EU have been diluted, unlike the sewage entering our rivers and seas, we put no checks on trade goods entering the UK from EU countries, the number of immigrants coming into our country is at the highest level for decades, our services from the NHS, to our schools and other essential services appear to be in a state of collapse despite all the money we 'saved'. And then, as if things could not become any more surreal, we join another trade partnership, the Comprehensive and Progressive agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) on the other side of the world after leaving the EU! I'm fully aware that all this cannot be laid entirely at the door of Brexit. Thirteen years of Conservative austerity has played a major part in the lamentable state of our country. However, many people who voted for Leave did so not because they hated the EU, they did so to protest against austerity. Unfortunately the Brexit Referendum in 2016 did not end austerity. On the other hand it's clear that leaving the EU has not improved the state of our country or proven to be the solution to our woes, things have only become far worse. Even those who support Brexit and who write to the letters page saying so must acknowledge that Brexit has not improved life for the public. I have hope that some may yet go a step further and admit that it's made our lives worse, that Brexit was clearly not the solution, and that ending austerity is. JOHN DELL, Shotley. Load-Date: September 26, 2023  End of Document
