   Enjoying visits to 'wonderful' groups Paisley Daily Express August 9, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 491 words Byline: PAISLEY;RENFREWSHIRE Body   As Westminster closes its doors for the summer, people across Renfrewshire are still very much feeling the impact of the cost-of-living crisis. People are struggling to pay bills while we have this Tory UK Government that is determined to charge on with their failed Brexit experiment and a Labour opposition that is right behind them on the issue all the way. Leading economists, including former Bank of England governor Mark Carney, have warned Brexit is the reason the UK has higher and more stubborn inflation than countries in the EU; the UK's inflation is driving up mortgage rates, food prices and, in general, people in Renfrewshire's cost of living. The OBR forecast a four per cent hit to UK GDP and a 15 per cent hit to UK trade intensity because of Brexit. Analysis from Bloomberg Economics found Brexit is costing the UK £100 billion a year in lost output. Research from the LSE shows Brexit has already added £7bn to UK food bills, with households £250 worse off on average. Analysis from the House of Commons Library shows the UK has higher mortgage rates, and higher home and car insurance inflation, than our European neighbours and Scotland has missed out on more than £300 million in European support because of a 60 per cent shortfall in the UK Government's replacement funding. The writing is on the wall - Brexit has failed and is a key factor in why people are struggling just now in Renfrewshire. People in Paisley and Renfrewshire South did not vote for Brexit or the Tories. The UK Labour party has sold Scotland out before and will continue to do so by following Keir Starmer on this Brexit path to oblivion. There is another way: the SNP will always do what's best for the people of Scotland, we reject Brexit, Scotland can be a flourishing independent country reaping the same benefits that our neighbours in the European Union have. As it's recess from parliament, it is good to get out and about and visit as many of our wonderful community groups we have here in Renfrewshire as I can. It is always a pleasure to visit Active Communities at Station Seven in Johnstone. I was joined by Cllr Robert Innes for an update on the wonderful work the group have been doing. I remember visiting Active Communities when they had the small shop across the road on Quarry Street and to see what they have grown into, and how they have transformed the old Johnstone police station into a warm and welcoming community hub, is just fantastic. As well as having a host of community-led health and wellbeing classes and activities, Station Seven also has a community food pantry that has become a vital service in the area - they have events spaces, meeting rooms and co-working spaces. Since my last visit when the hub was just about to open, it was brilliant to see just how much Active Communities and Station Seven has grown and become the home for an array of vital services for local communities to get involved with from across Renfrewshire. Graphic    Meeting up Cllr Robert Innes and Mhairi Black MP with members of Active Communities Load-Date: October 31, 2023  End of Document
