   Exports from the UK to Ireland are almost twice 2016 levels; Goods and services worth £54bn came here despite Brexit hit Irish Independent August 31, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS WEEK;NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 1 Length: 536 words Byline: SARAH COLLINS Body   Ireland was the UK's fourth-biggest export market last year, ahead of France, China and even India, the largest economy in the Commonwealth. Data compiled by the UK's Office for National Statistics (ONS) show that since the Brexit vote in 2016, Ireland has moved up from fifth place in the rankings, despite UK exports being subject to cumbersome customs checks under a 2020 trade deal with the EU. The data, published by the UK's Department for Business and Trade last week, confirm Ireland's continued importance to the UK economy, despite Brexit. They come as polls show a majority of UK citizens now want closer ties with the EU. "There's no doubt that many firms initially regarded the UK's withdrawal from the EU as a significant headache," said Dave Field, founder and chief operations officer at customs clearance specialists Coll-8 Logistics. "Whilst some effectively decided to write off trade with Ireland and other EU member states, others recognised the clear commercial importance of finding a solution. "Those firms which persisted are reaping the rewards and are seeing an increase in Irish sales." Ireland was the destination for £54.7bn ((EURO)63.7bn) worth of UK goods and services last year, almost double the value of the UK's total exports to Ireland in 2016. The figures are backed up by the Central Statistics Office's international accounts for 2022. Ireland made up 6.7pc of the UK's total trade last year, the bulk of it - over £30bn - made up of goods exports, particularly chemicals, fuel and food. While the US is by far the UK's largest export market, Ireland ranks only marginally behind Germany and The Netherlands, which came in second and third place, and made up 6.9pc and 6.8pc of total UK exports in 2022, www.respectively.UK trade with The Netherlands is often distorted by the so-called "Rotterdam effect", where goods landing in Rotterdam are often re-exported elsewhere in the EU but are recorded as Dutch imports. Ireland ranked marginally ahead of France and China in terms of UK exports last year. India, which is currently negotiating a wide-ranging free trade deal with the UK, came in 12th place. Australia, which signed a UK trade deal in 2021, ranked 20th. Coll-8's Dave Field, whose firm automates customs paperwork, said he has seen a "steady growth" in the number of declarations for UK parcels, evidence that British retailers are doing more business here. Coll-8 is currently dealing with more than 40,000 declarations per day, on average. That compares to around 30,000 last year and 17,000 in 2021, the same year the Brexit trade deal took effect. CSO data shows that while Irish imports from mainland Britain slumped in 2021, they recovered significant ground last year, thanks in particular to a 42pc surge in goods imports. Some of last year's surge, however, was down to increases in global oil and gas prices. Ireland gets most of its fuel via Scotland. Trade patterns have also shifted, with Ireland increasingly doing business directly with Northern Ireland. Irish exports to mainland Britain have held fairly steady since Brexit, although the UK has yet to introduce its new border checks. They are due to be rolled out from next January, following a fifth extension. Load-Date: August 31, 2023  End of Document
