   Far-right Farage threatens to come back and give the 'Tories' the boot. CE Noticias Financieras English December 23, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 756 words Body   Former Olympic swimmer Johnny Weismüller was Tarzan of the Apes in twelve film adaptations (the first dating back to 1932) of Edgar Rice Burroughs' iconic novel. In one episode of the franchise, a young British aristocrat (Lord Greystoke) travels to Africa with his pregnant wife on a British crown mission to investigate how another European colonial power (he means Belgium) is enslaving the black population. The British, of course, are the good guys in the movie. In the jungle of British politics, the Tarzan character corresponds to Nigel Farage, historic leader of Euroskepticism and the far right in this country, who was instrumental in Cameron's calling of the Brexit referendum almost eight years ago, and thus of the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union. That he has failed in seven attempts to win a seat as an MP is the least of it. He has a case to be seen as the most influential British politician of the last decade. His party, Reform UK, could split the right-wing vote and facilitate an overwhelming Labour majority. Farage has just played a sort of modern Tarzan in the British version of the reality TV show The Celebrity Jungle , which he has used as a platform for his return to the political and media limelight after a period of relative obscurity, ever since he backed Boris Johnson to win the 2019 election and make a hard Brexit a reality. In this time he has presented a program on the GB News channel (the British Fox), and has been the honorary chairman of the far-right Reform UK party. But the coming change of electoral cycle, with Labour likely to come to power, is too juicy an opportunity for him to waste. Immigration is not the main concern of the majority of voters (it is in third place after the cost of living and healthcare), but it is of an important, working-class and socially conservative bloc, mainly in the north of England (the so-called "red wall"), which gave a decisive push to Brexit and he knows how to handle. If Farage were to stand at the head of Reform UK as a real executive leader instead of just honorary president, dedicated to exploiting the xenophobic feelings of part of his compatriots as in the Brexit campaign, the far-right formation (polls now give him between 8% and 11% of votes) could do a lot of damage to the Tories . It would probably not win any seats because of the electoral system, or at most a couple, but it would steal votes from the Conservatives to the point that it would lead to a landslide for Labour, with a majority of more than two hundred seats. Is that what Farage, who is at heart an ultra Tory, wants? Maybe yes, if he has become bored with life as a TV presenter and reality show contestant, and if his great ambition - as is speculated - is to eventually take over the leadership of the Conservative Party to, from the opposition and taking advantage of the racist tendencies in vogue, turn it into the British version of Vox, the Brothers of Italy, the German AfD or Marine Le Pen's National Rally. Its current bloc of followers, just like the supporters of the exit from Europe, are people of a certain age, which limits its electoral radius of action. Apart from making money (one and a half million euros), her aim in going to the Australian jungle to eat camel's hooves, sheep's vagina, kangaroo's anus and fish eyes was to approach the much younger audience of such programs and to put a spade in Flanders. At the moment, Reform UK lacks the infrastructure for a full-blown campaign, but patrons who gave money in the referendum to leave Europe could give it to Farage to run candidates in most constituencies and give the Tories hell, lots of hell. In the recent Tamworth by-election, the votes he stole from the Conservatives gave the seat to Labour, a pattern that could be repeated in many places in the north of the country. Farage's popularity among right-wing voters is far greater than that of Rishi Sunak, the current prime minister, and 70% say they would like him to return to active politics. One in nine who supported Johnson in 2019 say they would back the far-right leader, thick as thieves with Donald Trump, next year. Some 37% of Tories would be willing to give their ballot to Reform UK if he is their leader. Without Farage there would not have been the Brexit consultation, nor would the UK have left the EU and lived through the chaos of the last seven years. He believes the upcoming election will be another referendum, this time on immigration. And in that movie, he wants to be a kind of xenophobic Tarzan. Load-Date: December 24, 2023  End of Document
