   Former Prime Minister David Cameron's surprising return to British government CE Noticias Financieras English November 13, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 547 words Body   In a surprising move, former Prime Minister David Cameron was appointed Foreign Secretary of the British government - a position that is equivalent in Brazil to that of Foreign Minister. Cameron said that although he disagreed with Sunak's "some individual decisions", he believes the PM to be a strong and capable leader. - David Cameron, the prime minister who lost everything by betting against the Eurosceptics - The rise of Rishi Sunak, the UK's new prime minister - The decade when the UK was a republic instead of a monarchy Cameron was responsible for triggering the biggest event in British foreign policy in the last generation - Brexit (Britain's exit from the European Union). However, Cameron didn't want Brexit to happen: he proposed a referendum in the hope that his argument for remaining in the European Union would triumph. He stepped down as Prime Minister after his thesis was defeated at the polls. The current prime minister, Rishi Sunak, was a supporter of Brexit. Both politicians belong to the Conservative Party - which was split after Brexit. For Chris Mason, Politics Editor at BBC News, Cameron's appointment allows Sunak to argue that he is bringing Conservative politicians back together. For James Landale, the BBC's diplomatic correspondent, Cameron's return to government brings both risks and benefits to the government led by Sunak. Opposition MPs have criticized Cameron's role in the scandal involving the financial services company Greensill Capital during the Covid-19 pandemic. Cameron, who in 2018 became an adviser to the company, was accused of lobbying the British government so that it could obtain government loans. An investigation conducted by the government itself concluded that Cameron had not broken any rules in the episode. Landale says that Cameron's return to government has not pleased some wings of the Conservative Party either. When he was prime minister, he held the Brexit referendum; advocated closer relations with China; and supported the military intervention in Libya, which left the Arab country in tatters. But he also carries political weight, according to Landale. He may be the British government's fourth foreign secretary in four years - but he is well known on the international stage. That said, Landale asks: "Will the former prime minister use his unquestionable political weight to change the UK's foreign policy?" The correspondent points out that Cameron "has long been a friend of Israel, but in the past he has also been willing to be outspoken and critical" of the Israelis. He advocated passing legislation to ensure that the UK always earmarked 0.7% of its national income for foreign aid - a commitment that Rishi Sunak reduced to 0.5%. At the time, Cameron criticized the reduction. "Cameron's appointment brings potential risks and benefits," says Landale. One of his predecessors in Downing Street (where the British prime minister works and lives), Lord Rosebery, once said that having a former prime minister in the cabinet was "a passing and dangerous luxury". Among the other changes announced by Sunak at the top of the government are the replacement of Suella Braverman as Home Secretary by James Cleverly, who was previously Foreign Secretary, and the departure of Therese Coffey as Environment Secretary.  Load-Date: November 14, 2023  End of Document
