   France moves to ease rules for British second homeowners thetimes.co.uk November 14, 2023 Tuesday 12:01 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 366 words Byline: Ali Mitib Highlight: Amendment backed by senate would grant automatic long-stay visas Body   France could relax its 90-day visa rule for British second homeowners after French politicians claimed they had been “punished by Brexit”. The senate, the country’s upper chamber, has voted through an amendment to the country’s new immigration law that would grant British homeowners the automatic right to a long-stay visa. After the UK left the EU, all British citizens, including those who own a property in France, have been able to stay in the country without a visa for only 90 days out of every 180. If they want to stay for longer, Britons have to apply for a temporary long-stay visa, which allows them to remain for up to six months. Martine Berthet, a senator representing Savoie in the French Alps, proposed a change to the rules after receiving complaints from British second homeowners. She told The Daily Telegraph : “The Britons I have spoken to say that the current system is long-winded, difficult and full of pitfalls.” The senator argued that the rules were preventing Britons from contributing to France’s local economies and that this would result in an increase in vacant properties in tourist areas. Berthet added: “Ties are warming between France and the UK following the royal visit — and don’t forget, King Charles reserved his only official speech for the French senate. The British are privileged partners of France. History has shown this to be the case.” The ultimate guide for moving from the UK to Europe The amendment is due to be debated next month in the National Assembly. President Macron’s government, which does not have a majority in parliament, has already indicated that it will not back it. Nicole Gallop Mildon, a partner at Russell Cooke, a London-based law firm, said that waiting times for a visa had spiked since Brexit as France’s visa centres are “overwhelmed”. She said: “Before Brexit, they didn’t deal with Brits at scale. Now, they do and they are basically crumbling under the weight.” Last week Philippe Bas of the Republicans party said: “Generally speaking they [British citizens] didn’t have anything to do with Brexit, but Brexit has punished them. They must be able to come to France and make the most of their second homes and spend their money.” Load-Date: November 13, 2023  End of Document
