   Furry TikTok star in Brexit border row as vet smells a rat The Daily Telegraph (London) August 18, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 5 Length: 468 words Byline: James Crisp Body   A CAPYBARA with a large following on social media is at the centre of a Brexit border row after three people were convicted of charges related to smuggling the South American rodent from England to Northern Ireland. Zena Foord, who lives in Belfast, last year asked Michael Dickinson, the owner of a pet shop in Co Antrim, to obtain a capybara for her to have as a pet. He sourced one in Cambridge, and had James Hammond, a farmer based in Banbridge, Co Down, pick the animal up and transport it across the Irish Sea. Foord's son, Kyle Thomas, 18, a Tik- Tok star with more than 35million followers, named the rodent Queen Elizabeth and started filming videos of it for his social media channel. But when the animal fell ill last year and Foord took it for a check-up, vets alerted the authorities. Hammond had failed to obtain an animal health certificate and notify the authorities in Northern Ireland of the import. Foord, Dickinson and Hammond were arrested. The three pleaded guilty at Lisburn magistrates' court this week after a judge heard they had fallen foul of red tape that did not exist before the creation of the Irish Sea border after Brexit. Foord admitted keeping a dangerous wild animal without a licence between Oct 6 and 24 last year after telling investigators at her Belfast home she owned the capybara but did not know she needed permission and documents to bring her into Northern Ireland. Dickinson, from Carrickfergus, admitted transporting the animal without authority and failing to present a health certificate. Hammond, 34, admitted illegally importing the animal and failing to notify the Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs. The defendants were given two-year conditional discharges, which means they are spared further punishment but have a criminal record. The capybara died last year. Dickinson told the Belfast Telegraph the case was "an absolute farce". The businessman said legitimate pet traders were "now being treated the same as rapists and paedophiles" because of the legal changes after Brexit. Pet du jour How capybaras became an internet sensation The capybara, the world's largest and undoubtedly most relaxed rodent, has gone viral across the internet. Videos of the animal have been watched hundreds of millions of times on TikTok and Instagram, and led to a surge in demand for the animals as pets or in zoos. Some trace the popularity of the creature back to 2020, when a video emerged of a capybara called JoeJoe looking unperturbed in a speeding car, as hip hop blares from the vehicle's speakers. The footage, posted by a YouTuber called EGA Nation, has more than 3.7million views. The phenomenon grew when a song called Capybara became a hit on TikTok. Its lyrics are simple but effective: "Ca-py-bara, capybara, capybara, capybara, capybara, capybara." Graphic    Michael Dickinson, a pet shop owner, said Brexit rules were an 'absolute farce' after being prosecuted for importing a capybaraKyle Thomas, 18, a TikTok influencer, produced videos starring the capybara, named Queen Elizabeth, for his 35 million followers Load-Date: August 18, 2023  End of Document
