   GIVE THEM A BREAK? WELL, THAT CERTAINLY GAVE ME A LAUGH! Metro (UK) September 8, 2023 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10,11 Length: 597 words Body   n Marlene from Doncaster (MetroTalk, Thu) says we should 'give this government a break' because when they came to power, they were faced with Brexit, the pandemic, an energy crisis and a cost-ofliving crisis - and now the schools crisis. How does a break of five years in opposition sound? Matt, Barnet n Is Marlene having a laugh? This so-called government has been in office for 13 years. Isn't that long enough? They have only been helping their rich friends get richer and richer - oh, and now they're letting water companies dump raw sewage into our rivers and seas. It's definitely time for change - get the Labour Party to clean up their mess pronto. Angry, Wallasey n Marlene wants us to pity the government, but Brexit was their creation - they're faced with it because they introduced it to the national debate. Covid - the government caused increased numbers of deaths in care homes by not testing hospital patients who were sent into them. They issued laws to the public that they ignored themselves. They spent billions on testing and tracing - way more than it cost other countries - plus gave PPE contracts to companies that had never sold PPE. On the energy crisis, we buy about five per cent of our gas from Russia - way less than other countries - yet we had the highest bills, and companies made record profits. The government is reluctant to tax them more on their record profits at our expense. The cost-of-living crisis is a consequence of all the above. Voter apathy over this is why we're in the state we're in. Joe, London n HG from Maidstone (MetroTalk, Wed) suggests the country should discuss whether to rejoin the EU totally or just the single market/customs union, to stop people arguing about Brexit. Surely it's people such as HG, who still seem reluctant to accept the referendum result, who are keeping the arguments alive. We 'leavers' are still happy with the outcome and would rather now discuss another topic - while leaning on the bar. Rob, Essex n HG seems to think the cost of making Brexit work isn't worth it. Yes, it has its teething problems, but I'd vote Leave again 100 times over. The reason the UK hasn't yet seen all the benefits is that it has had a government that doesn't believe in Brexit and tries in every way possible to carry on in parallel as part of the EU. We've only nominally left - the worst of all worlds. The Conservative Party was given an 80-seat majority in 2019 to make the UK an independent sovereign country, and it just squandered the opportunity. Phil Jones, Redruth n Brexit was a con job by the elite, funded by dirty money. As the nation crumbles, we all have a choice next year to kick out the Tories - and we must campaign vigorously to rejoin the EU. Peter Benson, Bromley n Dear Rishi Sunak, yes, I agree the UK has a great future post-Brexit, so why push corporation tax up to 25 per cent from 19 per cent and not down to 15 per cent to assist in our global growth? Why take away tax incentives for visitors to use their purchasing power? Let's see incentives for growth. Sir Keir Starmer is not even a plastic Brexiteer and will ultimately lead us back to ever-increasing alignment - Brino (Brexit In Name Only) - in yet another betrayal of the silent majority. Jim, London n The report of 'rats as big as chihuahuas' (Metro, Wed) suggests a Pied Piper is needed. Cash-strapped councils would decline to pay, so the Pied Piper would entice away all the children - solving the problem of schools closed due to Raac. Jane, Edinburgh You are more likely to be published if you provide your name and location with your comment Load-Date: September 8, 2023  End of Document
