   Gove: Starmer is political jellyfish The Express October 4, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 301 words Byline: Steph Spyro Body   SENIOR Tories have branded Sir Keir Starmer a "Marxist" and "the jellyfish of British politics" at the conference. Michael Gove said the Labour leader's changing stance on Brexit showed he was "transparent, spineless, and swept along by the tide" like the marine animal. The Housing Secretary added that a Conservative government has "never been more necessary than now" and was able to deliver the long-term changes the country needed. He told delegates that the party had a "record to be proud of". The Cabinet minister went on: "We will take the fight to the Labour Party. The party of Jeremy Corbyn and his self-proclaimed friend Sir Keir Starmer. "Sir Keir, who was against Brexit, then wanted to accept Brexit, then wanted a second referendum on Brexit, then he said that he wanted to make Brexit work, and then just last month, he said he wanted a Brexit which was actually identical to EU membership. 'No spine'? Gove raps Labour's Sir Keir, below "He was saying, as he always does, whatever he thought people in the audience wanted to hear. "Sir Keir Starmer is the jellyfish of British politics." Work and Pensions Secretary Mel Stride said of Sir Keir: "You and I know exactly why Captain Hindsight can't make up his mind when it comes to welfare. "It's because his own instincts are totally out of touch with the majority of the British people. "Rather like Jeremy Corbyn, Keir Starmer truly is a Marxist. Because as Groucho Marx put it, 'I have principles but if you don't like them?well, I have others'." Prime Minister Rishi Sunak also claimed the opposition leader's approach was to "flip-flop on everything" and "don't stand for anything". Home Secretary Suella Braverman added: "The British people will decide if they want to curb woke with Rishi Sunak or let it run riot with Keir take-the-knee Starmer." Graphic    No spine'? Gove raps Labour's Sir Keir, below Load-Date: October 4, 2023  End of Document
