   Host of prominent Remainers advising Keir Starmer raises fresh fears that a Labour government would go soft on Brexit MailOnline June 26, 2023 Monday 10:03 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 535 words Byline: Martin Beckford Policy Editor For The Daily Mail Body   Starmer has in recent months had a briefing from Lord Cooper of Windrush Fresh fears have been raised that a future Labour government would go soft on Brexit after it emerged Sir Keir Starmer is being advised by a host of prominent Remainers. The Opposition leader has in recent months had a briefing from Lord Cooper of Windrush, a former Tory polling guru who was suspended from his party over his opposition to government policy on the EU. The pair were schoolmates as well as members of the East Surrey Young Socialists and Lord Cooper now 'wants Starmer to be prime minister', according to a report. Sir Keir himself has been given advice on how to run the country by Sir Tony Blair, who wanted Britain to adopt the euro. His Shadow Cabinet is also receiving training on how to operate in government from the handful of serving Labour MPs who have ministerial experience, including Sir Ben Bradshaw, who called for a second referendum. Sir Ben, standing down at the next election, told Times Radio that previous Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn had been a 'disaster' for the country because he failed to help Remain win. He added: 'You know, Brexit may well not have happened if it hadn't been for Corbyn, if we'd had a better, stronger leader who could have articulated the case of staying in the European Union more strongly to our working class base.' Moves are also afoot to insert pledges in Labour's general election manifesto that would move Britain closer to Brussels. The Labour Movement for Europe wants to make access to the single market a priority for the party's first term in power calling for full membership. The group also wants automatic alignment between the UK and EU on workers' rights and for Labour to support a trade pact called the Pan-Euro-Mediterranean Convention. These are ideas being proposed to the party's National Policy Forum. Shadow Foreign Secretary David Lammy gave a speech last night at a conference organised by anti-Brexit group Best for Britain at which he promised a Labour government would make improving relations with Brussels a priority. 'If you do not think Britain's relationship with Europe is of fundamental importance to our future, you are living in a fantasy,' Mr Lammy told the event. He vowed to 'improve our trade deal with the EU' when it comes up for review in 2025. But former Brexit negotiator Lord Frost warned: 'It's clear that, whatever the leadership says in public, Labour would push us back towards the EU if they ever got the chance.' Publicly, however, Sir Keir - who previously branded the Leave vote 'catastrophic' and campaigned for a second referendum - has ruled out bringing Britain back into the EU. He has pledged to make Brexit work and said arguments about rejoining the single market or customs union are 'in the past, where they belong'. Tory deputy chairman Lee Anderson said: 'Labour aren't hiding that their number one priority is to beg the EU to allow us back crawling on our hands and knees into their political union. 'Sir Keir spent years trying to block Brexit and overturn the largest democratic vote in this country's history - and still can't get over his EU obsession. Only the Conservative Government can be trusted to protect Brexit.' Load-Date: June 26, 2023  End of Document
