   HOW TORIES BR ORIES BROKE BRITAIN; In final day of our series on how Brexit dragged Scots against our will out of the EU, Anna Burnside puts the blame firmly on the self-serving politicians and their cynical political gamble Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 24, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 18,19 Length: 1400 words Byline: Anna Burnside Body   BACK in 2013, prime minister David Cameron promised a referendum on leaving the EU. He didn't want to leave, he just wanted to stop the right wing of the Conservative Party "banging on about Europe". That went well. Cameron is now living a quiet life in a £16,500 shepherd's hut in his garden in Chipping Norton. He resigned the day after the shock result of the 2016 referendum. His selfish political gamble opened the way for Theresa May, Boris Johnson, Liz Truss and now Rishi Sunak. As leaders of the still divided Tories, their job has been to turn slogans from an ugly and divisive referendum campaign into a functioning way of running the country. The huge turnover at Cameron's former gaff in Downing Street suggests that this is not as easy as putting a glib promise on the side of a bus. Current problems, from the increase in migrants willing to risk their lives crossing the Channel in inflatable dinghies to the price of salad, have their roots in Brexit. Take the right-wingers Cameron tried to shut up. They are still there, demanding that the referendum promise to reduce immigration to the tens of thousands be honoured. But there are massive job vacancies left by EU workers who wouldn't or couldn't stick around after Brexit and there are not enough home-grown workers to pick the lettuces. (Or make the coffees. Or be the GP.) Meanwhile, because the UK does not work with European partners on immigration issues, there are increasing numbers boarding dangerous small boats. Overall migration is at a record high. That ramps up the pain on the Prime Minister. But Brexit has brought misery to all our lives. Inflation, currently 8.7 per cent, comes from the increased costs of importing food and other goods. But it's also caused by rising wages, which are caused by staff shortages. The cost of fuel is also a factor. We were promised reduced fuel prices. Instead the pound's value is in the toilet. The UK is left buying oil and gas with a weak currency, in a market already savaged by the war in Ukraine. Fishermen thought rid of hated They've and ANNA Those puny pounds do not go far if we brave the airport queues and go to Europe on holiday. Once there, we need decent health insurance. A blue passport is not much help to a broken leg. BREXIT has shrunk the UK and turned us inward. Investment has fallen - why would an international company choose to put a factory or office here? If they want to export to the EU they face horrendous red tape. If their staff want to go anywhere they will have to queue at the airport . In February, AstraZeneca, the firm that made the Covid vaccine, announced its new factory would be in Ireland. We are losing out on lucrative international business. British universities used to carry out bi l l ions of pounds worth of pharmaceutical research, funded by the EU. Those jobs and opportunities, all that potential, gone. The idea that the NHS would get an extra £350million a week is perhaps one of the sickest jokes ever played on the electorate. Brexit has damaged our precious health service in many ways, from staff shortages to gaps in drug supplies. Fishermen thought they'dwould get rid of their hated quotas at last. Instead Brexit has been a disaster for the industry and left many feeling used then discarded as the campaign ended. Complaining is very unattractive, which is why the right tagged those of us who thought it was bonkers to leave the EU as "remoaners". But in the face of something obviously disastrous, a negative response is the correct response. And it's hard to overstate how damaging Brexit has been . What makes it so heartbreaking is that it was all so unnecessary. BREXIT was a referendum held by an overconfident prime minister who thought it would put his internal snipers' gas at a peep. It was fought using phony promises and wildly misleading figures. The Leave vote ended Cameron's career. It left us with Theresa May, who did her limited best to make it work, then Boris Johnson who could not be bothered to read the small print, or stop smirking and appreciate the gravity of what was at stake. The mess they have left will take decades to clean up. They printed lies on the side of a bus. Then they threw the country under it. BREXIT has seeped into every corner of our lives. It affects our huge decisions - where do we want to live, or study, or retire? And our smaller ones, like where we go on holiday or whether or not we put Greek olives and Spanish tomatoes into our shopping trolleys. Businesses have to cope with everything from screeds of paperwork and extra taxes to staff shortages and price increases. Even charities have seen their European funding dry up. We asked people across Scotland how leaving the EU has changed their lives… MAGGIE LENNON 62, CHIEF EXECUTIVE, BRIDGES PROGRAMMES I run a charity helping the social and economic integration of refugees and migrants . Before Brexit we worked with over 50 organisations in 15 countries. A lot of our funds came from the European Social Fund and other EU sources. Without it, Bridges wouldn't have had been so successful. I spent holidays in Europe where I have friends. I was thinking of retiring overseas. Now the charity has lost these major sources of income. This pressure is one reason I'm stepping down after 21 years. But I'm not moving to France. ALISON THOMSON 24, GRADUATE My parents are very well travelled and wanted my sister and I to experience the world outside the UK . These early trips to France, Italy and Greece opened my eyes. It was my life's mission to move to mainland Europe and make a life for myself. As soon as the result was confirmed I knew my dreams of living abroad had crashed. So I'm moving to Australia on a working holiday visa this year. I was not old enough to vote in the referendum. Lots of my older friends didn't bother. We had all these opportunities and they were thrown away. METTE SØLVTOFT BAILLIE 52, OWNER FREJA DESIGNER DRESSMAKING I'm Danish, married to a Scot, living in Scotland since 1991. After the referendum I had to apply for settled status. I didn't feel valued by the country I'd lived in most of my life, where I employ people and pay tax. I was rejected at first - they said they had no record of me. My business lost the couture dressmaking students who came via the Erasmus scheme. I was on TV in Denmark and Norway talking about Harris tweed. I couldn't sell the jackets I'd made because the import tax for each £350 jacket was £180. I lost around 50 orders. GARY CURLEY 43, GENERAL MANAGER, SLIGACHAN HOTEL, SKYE We have 35 staff, five fewer than 2019. We are fully operational but we've had to keep some of the changes we made during the pandemic. Covid definitely made Brexit worse. We don't serve food between the end of lunch and the start of dinner. That needs five staff. Most staff from Europe gained permanent residency. Three moved back. Since then we get very few applications from Europe - we used to get students desperate to work in Scotland. Urban hospitality can possibly fill their vacancies with locals but it's not an option. He re. CATRIONA AND CALUM THOMSON 58 AND 61, LECTURER AND IT MANAGER We have had a small holiday home on the west coast of France for 23 years. We go two or three times a year. We now have to take out health insurance which costs around £500 each a year. A pet passport is £250 for each visit. We also have to pay mobile phone roaming charges. We can't officially work from there now. Our car has a blue badge because our daughter has a disability but it's no longer recognised in France. We've not faced big airport passport queues but I've bought everyone a fake cover. LUCY MACKENZIE McNAE 33, TWIN ATLANTIC AND JOESEF TOUR MANAGER Looking after bands on tour has changed massively. There is a huge amount of paperwork and huge expense. Unless you have money behind you, you've financially crippled yourself before you leave Glasgow. I sleep less every time we go through an airport or get a ferry - we have to be there so early to go through all the paperwork. I can't be out of the UK for more than 90 days out of any 180. If I get a last-minute offer, if my 90 days are up, I'm stuffed. My other half has an Irish passport. I'm thinking of moving to Ireland to get one too. prices. Instead the is in the toilet. buying oil a weak market by Ukraine.  Fishermen thought they'd get rid of hated quotas. They've been used and discarded ANNA BURNSIDE  puny go the queues Europe Once Load-Date: June 24, 2023  End of Document
