   I'm a Celebrity viewers pick 'winner' after comment to Nigel Farage amid boycott threat gazettelive.co.uk November 19, 2023 Sunday 10:27 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: TV; Version:2 Length: 401 words Byline: By, Annette Belcher Highlight: Viewers of the ITV show say there is one clear winner already as Ant and Dec kick off a new series Body   I'm a Celebrity viewers have already picked the winner of this year's show. Ant and Dec kicked off a new series of the popular ITV show tonight Sunday at 9pm.  And while there has been some controversy around Nigel Farage appearing in the jungle this year, fans have been clear who they will be backing this year. This Morning presenter and former Big Brother contestant Josie Gibson is already a clear favourite to win the show.  It comes after The #BoycottImACeleb had been trending on X, formerly Twitter, on the run-up to the launch of the first episode. One of the first comments Josie made to Farage when the pair met during the first part of Sunday's show was: "It can't be worse than Brexit." It was after Josie admitted 'I thought this was a good idea until they dropped us off in the middle of nowhere. I've never been so petrified.' Nigel replied: 'It's something different in life, it's an adventure! It's a challenge, it's not going to be easy, but why not'. While Josie quipped: 'It can't be worse than Brexit!' Nigel Farage has made his debut on I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here by sticking his head through the window of a campervan filled with snakes. The former Ukip and Brexit Party leader was introduced on the show saying: "I'm a hero to some people and an absolute villain to millions. In the jungle you're going to find the real me. You might like me more, you might dislike me more, but you will at least find out. "The best way to handle conflict is to tackle it head on. I dealt with snakes in the European Parliament, I can cope with this too." Showing their love for Josie on X, @OfficialCABBAC posted on X: "Only interested in Josie Gibson winning." While @CButterley commented: "Josie to win already yeah" @nickharvey2242 shared: "I can tell you now that Josie Gibson has already won I'm a Celebrity." @fifisyms added: "Josie Gibson the second she meets Farage: It can't be worse than Brexit. LEGEND." @kinglenny1892 added: "Love Josie already, cant be worse than brexit. You tell him girl." And @Lou_LouD posted: "JOSIE GISON IS A QUEEN ALREADY AND MUST WIN. The line-up of the ITV show includes Jamie Lynn Spears, the sister of pop superstar Britney, TV presenter Fred Sirieix and YouTuber Nella Rose. Also in the mix this year is food critic Grace Dent, reality star Sam Thompson, JLS singer Marvin Humes, former EastEnders actress Danielle Harold and Hollyoaks actor Nick Pickard. Load-Date: November 20, 2023  End of Document
