   In ation, Remainers' last argument against Brexit, is now crumbling; True, price rises have been slow to fall - but that is not necessarily because of Britain leaving the EU The Daily Telegraph (London) September 21, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 21 Length: 917 words Byline: JULIAN JESSOP Body   At last, some better news on ination. Unless, that is, you want to use the latest data as evidence of the harm that Brexit is doing to the British economy. Admittedly, the small fall in the UK's ination rate last month, from 6.8pc to 6.7pc, is not much to cheer. Prices are still rising sharply, just at a slower pace. In particular, a drop in food price ination made one of biggest contributions to the fall in the headline rate, but food prices were still 13.6pc higher than a year ago. None the less, the latest data were better than many had feared. The Bank of England, along with most other forecasters, was expecting ination to edge back above 7pc. This miss, albeit a happy one, shows why forecasters and policymakers should pay more attention to monetary aggregates. Ination was widely predicted to jump due to higher fuel prices. In fact, it fell, which is consistent with the sharp deceleration in the growth of money and credit over the past year. What's more, there was a bigger fall in the "core" measure of ination that strips out food, energy, alcohol, and tobacco from 6.9pc to 6.2pc. This does not mean, of course, that these excluded items are any less important for families. Indeed, food and domestic energy bills typically account for a larger share of the budgets of the most vulnerable households on low incomes. But stripping out these more volatile components can provide a better guide to the underlying trend in ination - and where it is heading. The Bank of England is therefore right to watch this core measure closely. There are several other takeaways. The most immediate is the impact on this week's interest rate decision. Some of us have been arguing that the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) should have hit the pause button on interest rates several meetings ago, in order to assess the full impact of the tight squeeze that is already in place. But even if the MPC does decide to hike one more time, the better ination data should at least allow the Bank to signal that rates will then be on hold for along period - and that the next move is just as likely to be a cut. The Prime Minister is also now more likely to deliver on his pledge to halve ination by the end of the year. Rishi Sunak and Jeremy Hunt may still struggle to claim much credit for something that probably would have happened anyway. But it is obviously better to hit a target than to miss it. The UK does still have the highest ination rate in the G7 group of large, advanced economies. The usual suspects have jumped on this fact as more evidence of the harm done by leaving the EU. But on a closer look the latest data have actually undermined this argument further. Zooming in on the 12 largest EU economies, six now have core ination rates lower than the UK's 6.2pc. But the other six have higher rates - including Germany (6.3pc), the Netherlands (7pc) and Austria (7.4pc). So rather than being an ination outlier, "Brexit Britain" is bang in the middle of the pack. It makes more sense to compare the UK's recent performance on ination with that of our peers in the rest of Europe than to major energy producers such as the US and Canada, or to Japan, which has been mired in deation (falling prices) for decades. This still leaves something to explain. It does look as if ination will be slower to fall in the UK than in many of our competitors, and the additional frictions created by Brexit may be a small part of that. But I can think of at least four factors that are much more important. thers't is the relatively high cost of energy in the UK, which impacts both the headline rate and the core measure via the pass through of these higher costs to other prices. That goes along way toward explaining what has been happening in countries like the Netherlands, too. The second is a tight labour market and rapid growth in nominal wages, despite record net immigration. This is due in large part to a relatively large decline in labour force participation during and after the pandemic. The third is a series of policy choices. Some of these choices are good in other respects, notably the focus on supporting the most vulnerable by topping up incomes rather than measures that might reduce ination directly (such as slashing VAT). But some of these choices are bad, such as tax increases that are inevitably reected in higher prices, and the failure to tackle the many structural problems that are contributing to the cost of living, notably the lack of house building. The fourth factor, which is more positive, is the relative resilience of the UK economy, or at least where we are in the economic cycle. It is much less of a surprise that headline ination is lower in Germany, for example, given that they are already back in recession. This leaves Brexit no higher than fth on my list of reasons why UK ination might be so stubborn. It would be odd to claim leaving the EU has had no impact on the economy whatsoever. But on ination, as on trade, investment and overall economic growth, the evidence of a big hit is increasingly imsy. We are striking trade deals some Remainers insisted would not be possible. At the start of this month, revised data from the Oce for National Statistics showed that UK GDP recovered to pre-Covid levels in 2021, roughly 18 months earlier than previously thought. Maybe "Brexit Britain" isn't such a laggard after all. Julian Jessop (@julianhjessop) is an independent economist 'That it is highest in G7 has the usual suspects using it as evidence of harm of leaving EU' Load-Date: September 21, 2023  End of Document
