   Independence is our only route out of Brexit; Scots are beginning to realise that self-determination will be a positive step - back to Europe The Times (London) September 6, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 22 Length: 887 words Byline: Rosemary Goring Body   Launching their Brexit campaign, the odd couple Michael Gove and Boris Johnson announced that leaving the European Union meant "the NHS will be stronger, class sizes will be smaller, taxes lower, wages will be higher, fuel bills will be lower". Clearly, they were looking down the wrong end of the telescope. In The Daily Telegraph, Johnson envisioned the sunny uplands ahead: "British people will still be able to go and work in the EU, to live, to travel, to study, to buy homes and settle down. There will continue to be free trade and access to the EU single market." This drivel exemplifies Rory Stewart's take on the former PM in his memoir, Politics on the Edge: "His personality and entire career centred on having his cake and eating it." Seven years after the referendum, is Brexit done? Emphatically not. Nor will it ever be. Described by Patience Wheatcroft in the latest issue of The New European as "an economically illiterate decision", its impact on the British economy has been woeful. In a YouGov poll in July, 51 per cent of Brits wanted re-entry compared with 32 per cent keen to retain the status quo. For many in England, such figures represent a Damascene conversion, from disciples of the fanatical populist Nigel Farage and the merely fanatical Jacob Rees-Mogg to nonbelievers who realise they were conned. The rabidly anti-European far right of the Conservative Party, who corralled David Cameron into holding a referendum, by turns cajoled, threatened and lied to voters, while pandering to their worst instincts. Under the cunning tutelage of Dominic Cummings, people were promised a land of milk, honey, but above all low immigration. What have we now got instead? A crisis of desperate migrants fleeing war, famine and poverty, and a hostile Europe with whom we are on the back foot when trying to resolve the issue. Meanwhile, businesses - not to mention the NHS - are struggling because the army of immigrants, who were part of the British economic backbone, is gone. Where does this scenario leave Scots who long to be part of Europe once more? Well, Saturday's All Under One Banner march and rally in Edinburgh for "an independent Scotland in the EU" indicates the direction in which a substantial number are turning. Before Brexit, some of my friends disliked the idea of breaking up the UK because there was no guarantee that we would swiftly regain entry to Europe. In the wake of Brexit, however, independence has started to look like a positive rather than a negative step. It has become obvious that within the present UK constitutional settlement, Scotland will never get what it wants. For the Labour Party, we are simply a prop to lever it into power; for a certain kind of Tory, we are little more than its summer estate, for holidaying, festivals and grouse-shooting. Europe has always held a special place in Scotland's affections. The Auld Alliance has been romantically overegged, but the age-old political bond between us and France is nevertheless real. Miss Jean Brodie spoke for many when she declared "I am a European". Until our membership of the EU is regained, however, being a European remains a state of mind rather than a political and economic reality. Not that getting back into Europe will be easy. Ultimately, though, the EU is keen to maintain and expand its membership rather than see it shrink. A thorny issue is our borders. The wrangling over the Northern Ireland protocol and the resultant Windsor framework is no template for our own situation. Humza Yousaf, the first minister, has conceded there will be "light-touch" border controls, but according to the European political expert Dr Kirsty Hughes, this is wishful thinking. Whether it's checks on goods and services, or on people crossing between Scotland and England, the variables are complicated. While being a sovereign state within the EU and part of the "common travel area" will hold obvious economic and social benefits, writes Hughes, "that does not take away the challenges of having an EU external border between Scotland and England. Nor does it guarantee that there will be no identity checks at the Scotland- England border". Quite how this will be resolved remains moot. Despite the headaches ahead, the argument for independence was immeasurably strengthened by Brexit. Recognition that Scotland's political will had been steamrollered by a cabal of right-wing dinosaurs with no interest in our country tipped the balance for many. For me, seeking independence is an existential rather than an economic position. It is not about party politics but about integrity and self-respect. It is about running our own affairs, for good or ill. It is about having a government - of whatever persuasion - that understands and cares about its people and is neither geographically nor metaphorically distant from those it seeks to govern. In the meantime, we have a Conservative government in Westminster and the prospect of a Labour administration under a leader for whom the mere suggestion of rejoining Europe, as Wheatcroft writes, "has the same effect as garlic for a vampire". In other words: the worst of all possible worlds. Now that we have had Brexit, what we need is Fixit. For many of us, independence remains the way to achieve that. It is not about party politics, but integrity and self-respect Load-Date: September 6, 2023  End of Document
