   Internet scammers and political tricksters CE Noticias Financieras English October 30, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 879 words Body   I am not proud, but like many others I was a victim of an online scam. It had never happened to me before and the experience left me so embarrassed that I told very few people about it. I am certainly not alone in this. Nearly 43 million people in the UK have encountered suspected internet scams. While not everyone is duped in the same way I was, millions have been, and often at great cost. Recognizing the prevalence of such scams, the UK government recently introduced legislation aimed at mitigating the risks of online fraud. In the United States alone, it is estimated that one in ten adults fall victim to online scams and more than one million children have their identities stolen each year. As we age, many of us become increasingly vulnerable to electronic fraud, due to unfamiliarity with the digital world and our inherent charitable tendencies. In my case, I fell for one of the oldest internet scams: I received a message from someone claiming to be the teenage daughter of one of my friends who had been robbed in Cairo and had no money. She asked me for help to get her out of trouble. Naively, I sent a modest sum using my bank card. Fortunately, when my wife found out and pointed out that I had been scammed, I quickly updated all my card information to prevent any unauthorized use. The reason I make this shameful confession is that it sheds light on how, in recent years, several political leaders managed to avoid taking responsibility for promoting policies that were eventually revealed to be based on fraudulent promises and outright lies. In his recent book Big Caesars and Little Caesars, Ferdinand Mount convincingly explores the ways in which contemporary tyrants and authoritarian leaders evade responsibility for their deceptions and ascend to the heights of power. Although Mount refrains from drawing similarities among the strongmen whose political trajectories he examines, he highlights the shared tactics and strategies they used to seize and retain power. From historical figures such as Julius Caesar and Napoleon to current rulers, these bullies have often been portrayed as heroes in largely fabricated narratives. Julius Caesar, for example, is known to have embellished accounts of his campaign in Gaul, exaggerating his military achievements and downplaying his brutal treatment of the Gallic tribes. Similarly, Napoleon's heroic image was built on a partially fabricated narrative. Today this type of image manipulation is often the work of advertising experts. Drawing a parallel with today, one might wonder how nationalist charlatans like former US President Donald Trump and former British Prime Minister Boris Johnson evade responsibility for the disastrous consequences of their policies. Trump is basing his presidential campaign on the claim that President Joe Biden stole the previous election from him and claims he was on his way to making America great again when his Democratic opponents cheated their way to victory at the polls. By portraying himself as the victim of political fraud, Trump gained momentum in his quest for a return to the White House. Johnson, meanwhile, secured the leadership of the Conservative Party and rose to the position of prime minister by spearheading (and winning) the campaign to withdraw the United Kingdom from the European Union. During the negotiations that followed, he prioritized a quick brexit - bypassing parliamentary scrutiny - over securing the best possible terms of what was always likely to be a lousy deal. According to Brexit supporters, especially Johnson, the UK was to reclaim its sovereignty and leave the EU as quickly as possible. There would be no delays. The deal they envisioned was going to transform the UK into the Singapore of the Thames and make it a more formidable player on the world stage than it ever was as a member of the EU. The reality, as the British public is now realizing, is markedly different. Instead of strengthening the UK economically and politically, brexit exacerbated economic problems and eroded its global position. Not surprising, given that brexit meant erecting trade barriers between the UK and its largest market. Leaving the EU probably reduced our GDP by 4% and resulted in the executive branch - rather than our Parliament - having taken control of critical areas such as environmental regulation and food safety. Looking at the growing number of illegal migrants crossing the English Channel in makeshift boats, one can't help but wonder what happened to the enhanced sovereignty that the government assured us brexit would bring. At last, public opinion seems to have changed and many Britons finally recognize that brexit was a disaster. But why did it take so long to realize it? I suspect that voters were reluctant to acknowledge that they had been duped, in the same way that many of us are afraid to reveal that we have fallen for scams on the internet. Admitting to having been duped, whether by online criminals or political scammers, is never easy. But in both cases, owning up to our mistakes is a crucial step in ensuring it doesn't happen again. Chris Patten, Britain's last governor of Hong Kong and former EU foreign affairs commissioner, is chancellor of Oxford University. © Project Syndicate 1995-2023  Estafadores / Hacker  Load-Date: October 31, 2023  End of Document
