   Irish fishermen, caught between Brexit and global warming CE Noticias Financieras English August 18, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 651 words Body   When he finished school, Darragh McGuinness knew he wanted to join a fishing crew. But now, at 23, he fears climate change will kill an industry that supported his family for generations. "It's a massive problem," he says from the cockpit of the trawler Atlantic Challenge, where he works as a deckhand, which is berthed in Killybegs, northwest Ireland. "It could end fishing, at least in Ireland," he adds. Rising temperatures in the northern Atlantic Ocean during the summer months raise fears that fish will migrate to colder waters, adding problems to a struggling sector. In late July, the National Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced that the average surface temperature in the North Atlantic had reached a new high of 24.9°C. The Atlantic Challenge, like many vessels that sail from Killybegs, fishes for cod and mackerel, which are highly valued on the international market. It returns to port a day or two after the catch to keep the product fresh. "It's just worrying that this will push us further out, too far north and then it wouldn't be viable to go back to Killybegs," McGuinness explains. Sean O'Donoghue, chief executive of the Killybegs Fishermen's Organization, says climate change is having a "dramatic effect" on shoals of whitefish such as cod, which prefer cooler waters. "A matter of time." O'Donoghue fears it is "only a matter of time" before so-called pelagic fish such as mackerel, blue whiting and herring move permanently northward. "If the warming of the water continues, it is inevitable that pelagic species will leave these waters altogether. And we could end up with very few fish," he says. The Icelandic fleet further north is catching more and more mackerel, while the Irish fleet is catching more anchovies or sardines, fish common in warmer waters further south, he says. The July record is particularly disturbing as it occurs weeks before September, when the North Atlantic usually reaches its peak temperature. In June, NOAA detected an "extreme" marine heat wave off the coasts of Ireland and the United Kingdom. Glenn Nolan, who heads oceanographic and climate services at the Marine Institute of Ireland, explains that month had "significant" temperatures 4 to 5°C above normal for the country's summer coastline. Temperatures of up to 24.5°C, "as we have seen in some coastal bays around County Galway, are well above what we would expect as normal," he says. The expert prefers to wait for a specific study already commissioned to attribute the rise in temperatures in June and July to climate change. Problems since Brexit The UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) for decades attributed the intensity of these marine heat waves to global warming, he says. "The IPCC already looked at marine heat waves in general and they are very convinced that they can attribute them to human-caused climate change," he says. Nolan explains that these elevated temperatures create conditions for fish migration and warm-water algal blooms that cause "problems for shellfish and fish." The Irish fleet is already suffering the consequences of the loss of European Union (EU) fishing quotas following Brexit, the United Kingdom's exit from the bloc consummated at the end of 2020. The EU member country boxed in a 15% cut in fishing quotas in 2025 under a last-minute trade deal signed between London and Brussels. "Unfortunately, the deal that was done disproportionately hit Ireland," says O'Donoghue. "Its net effect is that Ireland is paying 40% of the fish transfer to the UK," he says. The head of the Killybegs organization expects changes to EU fisheries policy that will reflect the impact of Brexit on the Irish fleet and mitigate the effects of climate change on its catches. "We are not happy with the way things are in the common fisheries policy right now. It must change and take into account Brexit and climate change," O'Donoghue demands. Load-Date: August 19, 2023  End of Document
