   It's almost back to normal... if it can ever be normal again after Brexit - the UPS view; E MIDS AIRPORT WAREHOUSE CAN PROCESS UP TO 22,500 ITEMS AN HOUR Leicester Mercury August 16, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 20,21 Length: 889 words Byline: TOM PEGDEN Body   ONE of the top men in Europe at global delivery company UPS has outlined the big changes the business had to make dealing with the extra bureaucracy brought on by Brexit. UPS was one of the vast number of companies faced with more red tape after the government decided it wanted to leave the biggest trading bloc on earth. Craig McIntosh, UPS operations director for the UK, Ireland and the Nordics, said Brexit had compelled the business to invest in more staff after frictionless borders with our EU neighbours came to an end. But he said it was an issue the business was pretty much now on top of. He said: "I was out of the country when Brexit was taking place, based in Prague, so I had the view of my customers over there. "We had lots of customers who were used to moving volumes that were duty free, and suddenly it wasn't duty free. "They were used to getting the volume almost next day without any hiccups - it didn't require any customs clearance. "Suddenly, that changed overnight, and that certainly happened in the UK. "What surprised me was how little people seemed to understand how Brexit would impact them in regards to the general day-to-day process of bringing goods in from Europe - the increase of costs they would see due to duties and delays. "I think we've done a really good job managing that, and now it's almost back to normal. If it can ever be normal again after Brexit. We get fewer concerns raised. "We're more equipped now to make sure that there are fewer delays, if any. We're navigating all the complexities of global trade and ensuring our customers can get packages as and when they made them. "Everything has required customs clearance so we've almost doubled our brokerage team overnight. At the moment we've got, I think, 175 people employed in brokerage alone. "Businesses have had to adapt and change. I think it'd be remiss of me not to mention our sales team, who did a great job going out to our customers and educating them on what the changes meant to them. "They did an outstanding job, certainly helping smooth things along, that's for sure." Mr McIntosh spoke to the Mercury's sister website BusinessLive after UPS launched a daily service between its 5.2 million sq ft Worldport air hub in Kentucky and Dublin and East Midlands Airport - carrying anything from healthcare to small package goods between the three countries. Despite Brexit and tough global market conditions the business is making significant investment in the UK and Ireland and recently opened a sorting and delivery centre in Telford. A Dublin healthcare facility is also expected to open early next year. In 2021 the business opened a fully automated 1.2 million sq ft UK air hub at East Midlands Airport. That £138 million warehouse can process as many as 22,500 packages an hour, making it the company's second biggest European air operation after Cologne. The global UPS business generated revenues of $100 billion last year - up 3.1 per cent, despite slowing domestic volumes and "softness" in its China trade. Mr McIntosh said the UK was the second biggest EU market behind Germany for UPS, reflecting the nation's huge shift towards online shopping in the last decade or so. It is a shift he has watched first-hand having joined UPS predecessor Atlas 34 years ago aged 20, starting off as a sorter then "pretty much working in every position in Manchester" before working his way up to management roles across the UK. As a divisional manager he moved south to look after London for the Olympic Games in 2012, then took over the East Midlands Airport operation before spending two-and-a-half years in Sweden and four years in Prague, looking after Eastern Europe. He took up his current senior post in 2021 - which takes in overseas shipments and final mile delivery to customers. In the UK alone that includes more than 50 sites and 5,000-plus people, and growing. He said: "UPS has invested more than £250 million in the last five years to build capacity into the UK network. "And £138 million of that was on the expansion of the East Midlands hub, which alone supports over 600 people in operations and in customs brokerage. "East Midlands Airport gets flights arriving from Cologne, from Edinburgh, from Belfast, and from Philadelphia, and they contain packages that are distributed across the UK to homes, access points and to commercial addresses. "It's almost everything from medical equipment to gifts from granny." Other investment in recent years has seen £120 million spent on a 350,000 sq ft hub at the London Gateway in Essex, as well as new buildings in Telford, Warrington in the north, and Weybridge in Kent. Later this year there will be expansions in Edinburgh and Swansea and a new building in Telford that can sort 5,000 packages per hour. Each site, he said, inevitably means more jobs. "It will depend on the growth of the volume, but yes, as a company and as an organisation, we continue to grow and we continue to employ people. "We created jobs in the East Midlands when we expanded there and the opening of Telford created 25-plus jobs and we will create jobs in every building where we open." UPS operates in more than 220 countries, with more than 540,000 employees worldwide. It launched in Seattle 114 years ago and today has its global headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia, with UPS Airlines based in Louisville, Kentucky. Graphic    UPS plane at East Midlands Airport. Below, Craig McIntosh ANTHONY UPTON Load-Date: October 31, 2023  End of Document
