   It's time to trumpet the benefits of Brexit; Dailymail COMMENT Scottish Daily Mail July 21, 2023 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 16 Length: 298 words Body   REMEMBER those doom-laden prophesies that Brexit would render the UK an isolated irrelevance on the world stage? Or that it would trigger a flight of multinational companies from these shores? Two announcements have given the lie to those shibboleths, while hammering home the tangible benefits of leaving the EU. Tata Group, the conglomerate which owns Jaguar Land Rover, will construct its £4billion electric car battery plant in Somerset, creating thousands of jobs. The firm considered locating the cuttingedge factory in Spain. But thanks to Brexit, Britain won the battle. Unshackled from the bloc, we were able to provide subsidies quickly, rather than getting bogged down for years by the deadening bureaucracy in Brussels. The second Brexit bonus was joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trading alliance which generates 13 per cent of global income. Stuck in the economically calcifying EU, striking such an exciting deal would have been forbidden. Predictably, the anti-Brexit brigade - led inevitably by Labour and the BBC - belittles these achievements. Obsessive hatred of Britain's newly restored sovereignty blinds them to any advantages it brings. But couldn't the Government trumpet the benefits? There have been successes: the vaccine rollout and our early, strong support for Ukraine to name but two. It is inexplicable that Brexiteer Rishi Sunak seems so reluctant to champion it. Brexit is not just about constructing new commercial and diplomatic relationships around the world. It is about imagining and building the country Britain can be. Despite at times being disappointed by our politicians' lack of ambition, the Mail remains convinced of its almost limitless potential. The PM should embrace it. For if the project flops, it will be seen as a catastrophic Tory failure. Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
