   It's time to trumpet the benefits of Brexit; COMMENT Mail on Sunday (London) July 21, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14 Length: 323 words Body   REMEMBER those doom-laden prophesies that Brexit would render the UK an isolated irrelevance on the world stage? Or that it would trigger a flight of multinational companies from these shores? Two announcements this week have given the lie to both those shibboleths, while hammering home the tangible benefits of leaving the EU. Tata Group, the Indian conglomerate which owns Jaguar Land Rover, will construct its £4 billion electric car battery plant in Somerset, creating thousands of skilled jobs. The firm considered locating the cuttingedge factory in Spain. But thanks to Brexit, Britain won the battle. Unshackled from the bloc, we were able to provide subsidies quickly, rather than getting bogged down for years by the deadening bureaucracy in Brussels. The second Brexit bonus was joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trading alliance which generates 13 per cent of global income. Stuck in the economicallycalcifying EU, striking such an exciting deal would have been forbidden. Predictably, the anti-Brexit brigade - led inevitably by Labour and the BBC - belittles these achievements. Obsessive hatred of Britain's newly restored sovereignty blinds them to any advantages it brings. But couldn't the Government at least trumpet the benefits? There have, after all, been notable successes: The vaccine rollout and our early, strong support for Ukraine to name but two. We know Chancellor Jeremy Hunt is a Remainer. But it is inexplicable that Brexiteer Rishi Sunak seems so reluctant to champion and exploit it. Brexit is not just about constructing new commercial and diplomatic relationships around the world. It is about imagining and building the country Britain can be in this new, exciting era. Despite at times being disappointed by our politicians' lack of ambition, the Mail remains convinced of its almost limitless potential. The PM should embrace it. For if the project flops, it will be seen as a catastrophic Tory failure. Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
