   Keep the faith with Brexit, there are better days ahead The Express June 24, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 724 words Byline: Patrick O'Flynn Body   SEVEN years ago today it was very heaven to be alive if you were a longtime Brexit campaigner who had stuck to your guns in the face of marginalisation and mockery from the political establishment. As the sun came up over Westminster, there was one word beginning with "EU" that was very much in vogue among the campaign groups I had worked with: euphoria. Early on June 24, 2016 the words of David Dimbleby on the BBC summed up the tumultuous upshot of the referendum: "That's it, we're out." Of course, that wasn't it.After initially seeming to accept the result, many on the Remain side decided they could stop Brexit and got close to doing so. A certain Keir Starmer took the Labour Party to a position of backing a second referendum at which "nobody is ruling out The years of uncertainty before we did formally leave in January 2020 undoubtedly harmed our economy and society, causing businesses to pause investment decisions and polarising voters. Our eventual exit terms were also worsened by Theresa May's ineptitude and then the pro- Remain majority of MPs passing a law dictating that we could not leave without an agreement with Brussels, thereby undermining UK leverage. BUT IT would be facile and slippery just to blame Remainers for Brexit not having transported us to the sunlit uplands envisaged by many of its leading campaigners. With living standards falling, inflation rising and growth stagnating people are quite entitled to ask: Has it all been a sevenyear glitch? Have the intervening years proved that we should have stayed in the embrace of Brussels after all? To which my answer is a resounding "no". The truth is that if we are examining eco- nomic impacts then that of Brexit has been dwarfed by two other tumults: the Russian invasion of Ukraine and more especially Covid. The pandemic led to epic money-printing, gargantuan public borrowing, huge and generally deleterious changes in employment patterns such as the rise in working from home, a rash of early retirements and a surge in long-term absences due to illness. Supply chains collapsed. More money chasing fewer goods led to inflation. Beside all this, a bit more paperwork surrounding the 12 per cent or so of UK economic activity that involves exports to EU markets is small beer. Yet has this change to the terms of trade been experienced as an economic head wind? Probably so. The adjustment costs of leaving the EU were always going to be front-loaded and the benefits - such as dynamic trade deals with non-EU countries - backloaded. Yet they are starting to come through in agreements like Britain's membership of the booming CPTPP trading zone. We are also now saving around £14billion a year in EU membership contributions. If hugging Brussels tight had been a better course then why is the eurozone - the EU's flagship economic entity - in recession while the UK has so far avoided one? Britain has fared about the same as Germany. If you are looking for the root of our ills, you will not find it in Brexit. Of course, our Conservative government could have done far more to exploit Brexit freedoms. For instance, it is now empowered to scrap VAT on domestic energy bills but has just chosen not to do so. Yet during the Covid crisis being outside the EU undoubtedly made it easier for us to run our own vaccines programme and get ahead of the curve. While we could in theory have done this as a member state, the fact that the sclerotic European Medicines Agency was based in London would have made that politically unfeasible. EQUALLY we could in theory have got weapons to Ukraine just as quickly as we did early last year. But the realities of EU politics would really have meant us moving in lockstep with Germany and France, leaving the Ukrainians lacking vital equipment when the Russian tanks rolled in. The British people voted on four decades of Brussels entanglement. They were not impressed. We've been properly out for less than three years, during which the entire Western world has been rocked by the outrageous behaviour of China and Russia. Those bad-mouthing Brexit now are largely those who experienced it as an affront to their cultural worldview and never got over it. So keep the faith. And never doubt this amazing country of ours really is worth more than a star on someone else's flag. 'We're saving around £14bn a year in contributions to EU' Graphic    HALCYON DAYS: Brexiteers celebrate moment Britain leaves EU in January 2020GETTY DEVLIN/ ANTHONY Picture: Load-Date: June 24, 2023  End of Document
