   Keir Starmer's allies crush bid for debate about 'the Tories' disastrous Brexit deal' at Labour conference despite pleas from Lord Kinnock and Alastair Campbell - while David Lammy says improving UK-EU relations is a 'priority' for the party MailOnline October 9, 2023 Monday 9:54 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 471 words Byline: David Wilcock, Deputy Political Editor Body   Labour's leadership has seen off attempts by former leader Lord Kinnock and Tony Blair era spin chief Alastair Campbell to have an open debate on 'the Tories' disastrous Brexit deal' at Labour Conference. The two Remainers lead a campaign by pressure group Labour 4 Europe to have a debate and vote on pursuing closer ties with Brussels at the event in Liverpool. But the effort came to nothing despite the two big beasts of Labour politics issuing social media videos urging party members to allow the debate to go ahead. Sir Keir has been battling to keep a lid on Brexit divisions in the party, dashing hopes of the pro-EU wing that it will seek to rejoin the single market or customs union if it wins power. However, shadow foreign secretary David Lammy today told the conference that improving the relationship with the EU would be a 'priority' for a Labour government. Mr Campbell, who was Mr Blair's firebrand top spin doctor when he was in No10, said: 'This conference gives Labour the opportunity, after the shambles of last week, to show that they're serious and part of being serious is debating the things that are doing real damage to this country. And that includes the Tories' disastrous Brexit deal.' And Lord Kinnock, who led the party to defeat in the 1987 and 1992 general elections, added: 'Everyone now knows that Brexit has inflicted, is inflicting, terrible costs and losses on our economy and it's diminished our country internationally.  'Obviously Labour wants to change that bleak reality, and part of doing that should involve discussing it at our conference.' Allies of the leader kept the issue off the floor. Instead Labour delegates will debate and vote in seven subjects: Defence, Ukraine, Critical infrastructure, Industrial strategy, education and skills, Social care workforce, Technology and AI in the workplace, and Energy. In his speech to conference this morning Mr Lammy said: 'Earlier this year the Conservative Party Press Office attacked me for saying that improving our relationship with the European Union will be a priority. Conference, I'm happy to repeat it. 'If you have forgotten that Britain's trade with Europe is a priority for our economy, you need to wake up.  'If you've forgotten Britain's alliances in Europe are a priority for our security, you need to wake up. 'If you've forgotten we need to work with Europe to tackle organised crime, you need to wake up. 'If you've forgotten UK universities depend on links with Europe, you need to wake up. 'If you've forgotten the French President is our friend not our foe, you need to wake up. 'With Labour there will be no return to the Single Market or the Customs Union. 'But Keir Starmer is committed to improving our relations with the EU. Delivering Britain a much better deal. And seeking a new security pact to keep our country safe.' Load-Date: October 9, 2023  End of Document
