   Kemi to slam[...] The Express October 2, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 343 words Byline: Sam Lister Body   KEMI Badenoch will today slam Labour for blaming Brexit for every difficulty the country faces. Sir Keir Starmer's party is relentlessly talking down the country and wrongly blaming global challenges on Britain's departure from the EU, the Business Secretary will say. Ms Badenoch will say commonsense Conservatism focusing on getting things done is what is needed. She will say: "It has been a difficult time to be in government anywhere in the world. "Ministers in other countries tell me about supply chain issues affecting everything from getting car components to stocking supermarket shelves. They tell me about how they are coping with unfilled vacancies as societies from Germany to Japan get older. But it is only when I am back in the UK that I am told all these issues are down to Brexit." The Daily Express understands Ms Badenoch will tell the conference she is about delivery, not rhet- oric, and will highlight work to make the most of Brexit. She will add: "Our political opponents are obsessed with viewing every problem as Brexit. Relentlessly wanting to talk down our country. "So I'm here to set the record straight. They tell you Brexit is costing Britain 4% of GDP per year. Wrong and economically illiterate. Recovery "The UK's recovery from Covid has outpaced France and Germany. This year we overtook France to become the thirdlargest manufacturer in Europe." Ms Badenoch will say exports are up and London still remains a top financial destination. She will add: "The people who tell you that Brexit is the cause of every problem do so because they think the answer to everything is the EU. "Listen to what Keir Starmer says...His answer to the global challenges we face is to tax more, regulate more and ask the EU what to do next. "Our Prime Minister is different. He refused to cave to the public sector union barons, or dance to the tune of the metropolitan bubble on energy policy. "What he did two weeks ago was brave. Shattering a lazy consensus about the costs of net zero.We can't deliver our targets with magical thinking." OPINION: PAGE 12 Graphic    Stand up for UK…Ms Badenoch Load-Date: October 2, 2023  End of Document
