   King Charles III in France: pomp and protocol in a visit of great political weight CE Noticias Financieras English September 22, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1153 words Body   In the last chapter of their three-day state visit to France, King Charles III and Queen Camilla are returning to their old stomping grounds in Bordeaux, the region that the British controlled for three centuries during the religious wars. The sovereign would have preferred the two and a half hour train ride but had to choose the plane for security reasons. It is the end of a visit of high political significance in the battered Franco-British and British relations with Europe. If the British government does not understand the extent to which Brexit damaged that bond, at least they have a new sovereign who knows it. He is pro-European, pro-climate change, speaks French and bid a friendly farewell to the Macrons. The queen and the first lady, with a kiss. For three days, Charles III, in impeccable French, embroidered and achieved a presidential friendship and a respectful enthusiasm in the French political class that there is a better future between the two countries and with Europe. The diplomatic ping pong, in the neighborhood of St Denis, between Queen Camilla and Brigitte Macron, the French first lady, show that the Royals are looking for a new style, more informal and closer. Madame Macron showed her surprisingly sporty superiority in the "Photo Opportunity". Britain's King Charles III and Queen Camilla on Friday visiting an organic vineyard near Bordeaux, France. Photo. REUTERS Charles III's tour was highly political, beyond the constitutional restrictions placed on a British head of state. On the anniversary of the formation of the first republic in 1792 and the abolition of the monarchy, he spoke before the French Senate in front of deputies and senators. There he called for the renewal of "an entente cordiale", created before the First World War, to heal the differences again. They are similar to those created by the Brexit and its brutal negotiations between the kingdom, France and the EU. The sovereign became the first British king to speak before deputies and senators in the imposing French Senate, in the Jardin du Luxembourg. The Republic, which guillotined his relatives, welcomed the king. His mother, Queen Elizabeth, had spoken to the senators in 2004 but in a conference room. The new British sovereign left to a one-and-a-half minute ovation and a hope. The legislators were able to understand that a good relationship can be recreated, beyond the damage produced by the European divorce. On the second day of his state visit, King Charles III pledged to French parliamentarians, in his own language, to "do everything in his power to strengthen the essential relationship between the United Kingdom and France." "The United Kingdom will always be one of France's closest allies" and "together, our potential is limitless," he insisted in French. The aftermath of Brexit in Britain. British historian and journalist Sir Simon Jenkins knows the sovereign very well. They went to university together, they converse, they have confidence in each other. "Britain is currently and evidently suffering from the consequences of Brexit. Westminster politicians encouraged it with childish hostility and contempt for Brussels and other European states throughout the 2016 campaign," he told the Guardian. "When I heard Brexit supporters scoff that Europe needed Britain more than Britain needed Europe, I wondered what horror awaited us. Now we know. By 2019, Paris had overtaken London as Europe's top destination for foreign tourists and has remained there. People don't like to be made to feel unwelcome," the historian explained. Charles III before the French Senate on Thursday in Paris. Photo: EFE  "Charles has no special knowledge of the French political spheres, nor should he have. It is known that he has serious interests, especially for the environment and cultural promotion. It can't be wrong that these interests are shared with Macron, and we assume that Macron can choose for himself whether he wants to listen or not," Jenkins said. According to YouGov, after Brexit, the percentage of French people who had an unfavorable opinion of the British rose from 33% to 42%. British opinion of the French moved the same way. On the other hand, the French have always had a soft spot for the British royals. According to Le Figaro, 71% of the French public is "in favor" of the British monarchy. Seven million watched the Queen's funeral on French TV channels, with a 66% market share, according to Jenkins. Eco-friendly visit After two days in Paris, the British sovereign traveled this Friday to Gironde, for a visit marked by friendship and Franco-British ecology. The end of the tour. Hundreds were waiting for him in front of the town hall with French and British flags. Before Charles III, his mother Elizabeth II spent two days in Bordeaux, during a state visit to France in June 1992. Accompanied by the then president François Mitterrand and received by the mayor Jacques Chaban-Delmas, she visited in particular the Saint-André cathedral. The queen had also reversed roles, becoming a host herself, by inviting the president and the mayor to a dinner aboard the Britannia, the British crown yacht, docked at the quay of the Garonne and where she stayed. Following in his mother's footsteps, Charles III will stay only a few hours in Bordeaux. But the austerity of Gordon Brown left him without yacht Britannia to the Royals. It was dismantled in 1997. Another time, another century. The king landed this Friday in Bordeaux, 45 years after his first visit. He went to the City Hall, which has been preparing for months this short and last stage of the trip. His first interlocutor was the ecologist mayor Pierre Hurmic, with whom he planted a tree. The official declared the climate emergency upon his arrival in office. King Charles III and Queen Camilla, this Friday in Bordeaux, France. Photo: EFE Historical links Gironde is home to the largest British community in France. Many chose to stay in France and in Europe in the face of the arrival of Brexit. Others have secondary residences, which they can only use 90 days a year, because of the Brexit. The King and Queen Camilla visited the vineyards and chateau of Smith Haut Laffite, a pioneer in the sustainable production of wine. Also at the reception was Alain Juppé, former mayor of the city and former Prime Minister of France. Charles III did not choose Bordeaux at random. The capital of the Gironde has close ties with Great Britain, inherited from its past. The English dominated the province of Aquitaine for three centuries in the Middle Ages, following the marriage in 1152 of Eleanor, duchess of the province, to Henry II Plantagenet, who would become king of England. This domination ended with the Hundred Years' War in 1453. Today, according to INSEE, 39,000 Britons live in the region of New Aquitaine, or a quarter of the population living in France. As for Bordeaux, it is twinned with the city of Bristol. CB Load-Date: September 23, 2023  End of Document
