   Labor Party promises Britons economic security, tiptoes around Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English October 10, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1094 words Body   One of the first missions Keir Starmer embarked on when he was elected leader of the UK Labour Party three and a half years ago was to eradicate all traces of the anti-Semitism that had surfaced in the party during the years of his predecessor, Jeremy Corbyn. The fact that Israel has suffered the worst attack in half a century at the hands of the Palestinian militia Hamas at the same time that the party's congress began in Liverpool has become the ultimate test to see if Labour, which all the polls already place on the path to electoral victory, finally controls its internal ghosts. At the gates of the Liverpool Stadium and Convention Center (ACC), where they are holding their annual congress this week -the last one before a general election-, barely 30 people with Palestinian flags denounced the apartheid that, according to them, is practiced in these territories by Benjamin Netanyahu's government. Inside the building, the Friends of Israel Labor Group had a full house in one of the meeting rooms. The slogan was clear and was obeyed. No noise and no stridency. Starmer's Labor Party promises economic growth hand in hand with employers and unions; greater public investment without unbalancing the country's accounts; or rapprochement with the EU without getting rid of the Brexit scare. Just as the Labour Congress was getting underway, the company Savanta published the results of a survey in which it had consulted 750 small businesses and 250 medium-sized and large companies throughout the United Kingdom. Forty-five percent of those polled preferred a Labour government, led by Starmer, compared with 32% who favored the Conservatives. "If there is a change of government and Labour takes the reins, we will see greater willingness to negotiate and engage with our partners. A change of tone. Less arrogance. No more considering the UK as an exception in the world," Naomi Smith, the executive director of Best for Britain, an organization that was created to campaign against Brexit and today works on analyses and proposals so that ties with the continent are not broken, explains to EL PAÍS with hope. "I think with Starmer we will see a grown-up diplomacy, willing to cooperate with other liberal democracies in the world, rather than compete with them," Smith adds. His organization occupies one of dozens of booths that populate the entire Liverpool convention center. The British party congresses, with which the political year begins each year, are a fair that brings together politicians, activists, journalists, businessmen, and a whole panoply of organizations that organize their own parallel activities and debates. These are called fringes, or peripheries, and they are usually more interesting than the official program. "When Keir Starmer took over the reins of the party, he designed the change he was pursuing in three phases. First, he had to deal with the internal mess inherited from Jeremy Corbyn. Second, he had to consolidate the public's belief that Labour could be trusted as a viable option for government. Finally, it had to outline what that government would consist of. This Congress is the time to fulfill that third phase," explains analyst Philip Collins, author of Tony Blair's best speeches and of some of Starmer's speeches. Security Economics The new Labour leader's team has discovered the Achilles heel of most British voters. It is not anger unleashed by the financial crisis, nor by the inequality generated by years of austerity. It is the fear derived from the uncertainty brought about by Brexit, the pandemic and more than a decade of Conservative governments that have been unable to transmit security. That's why the party's second star, Economy spokeswoman Rachel Reeves, has dubbed her proposal securenomics, a play on words that combines security and economics. Reeves, a former Bank of England analyst, took to the center dais of Congress on Monday to present her plan. "It's impossible to dream big if you can't sleep peacefully at night. And that peace only comes when you know you have a rainy day fund, and when you know that, should you need it, there will be strong public services for you and your family," she said. Fiscal discipline, budgetary responsibility, but also the right drops of class struggle, to make it clear that the party's priority is more about workers' wages than lowering taxes for those who already earn too much. Google, Meta, Britain's leading supermarket chain, Sainsbury's, energy companies and business associations have all bid this year to have their own stand on the fringes of the Labour Congress. Victory smells close, and discrepancies, nuances, even internal battles, fade away. GMB, the union that has pushed for the most belligerent strikes in the UK during the last year, in train and bus services -and had its confrontation with Starmer when the party leader banned his deputies from joining demonstrations and pickets-, is the first to praise now from its stand in Liverpool the efforts of the new leadership. "The Tories have completely wrecked the economy. Wages have been flat for years, and have even gone down. For the first time in history, sons are being paid less than fathers," Gavin Sibthorpe, a member of GMB's National Executive Committee, tells the correspondent. "The party has a clear industrial strategy, it knows where investment is needed to grow the economy. It is up to us to demand that that growth is shared and reaches workers," the unionist qualifies. Starmer is too intent on convincing the British people that he is capable of ushering in a new era for Brexit to derail him. That is why his speech on Europe is limited to a few fine words about future cooperation and the uncertain promise to renegotiate, for the better, a trade treaty that Brussels has little desire to reopen. From the north bank of the River Mersey a large ferry can be seen moored at the other end. It connects Liverpool with Belfast. It travels the length of the Irish Sea to link two cities in the United Kingdom. The shipping company, Stena Line, has written on the side of the vessel a slogan as contradictory as it is ironic: Connecting Europe for a Sustainable Future. Some delegates and party activists lean on the railing and watch the seagulls that have landed on the mounds of sand created by the low tide. The idea of reconnecting with Europe, for the moment, produces indifference in the Labor ranks. It is more urgent to reconnect with the British electorate. Follow all the international information on Facebook and X, or in our weekly newsletter. Load-Date: October 11, 2023  End of Document
