   Lax post-Brexit trade rules pave way for invasive species to come to Britain The Guardian (London) August 25, 2023 Friday 11:23 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved  Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:1 Length: 566 words Byline: Helena Horton Environment reporter Highlight: UK has not reciprocated after EU banned import of pot plant soil, in which some species can travel undetected Body   Invasive species are increasingly likely to come to Britain because of lax post-Brexit trade rules, experts have warned. The EU has banned the import of soil in pot plants from the UK since Brexit, partly because invasive species such as the Asian hornet can travel undetected in soil. The UK has not put reciprocal bans in place, however, meaning damaging species from the continent could be transported in soil. Last week, it was revealed that this year has been the most prolific in England for Asian hornets , which kill native bees. There have been 45 Asian hornets, including 29 nests, seen in the country  since the species was first observed in 2016, and this year there have been 22 sightings. This is a large increase since 2022, when only two Asian hornets were seen, and 2021, when there were also two sightings. The Asian hornets first came to Europe in 2004 when they were spotted in France, and it is thought they were accidentally transported in cargo from Asia. They rapidly spread across western Europe and have crossed the Channel to Britain, probably also in cargo. Thirty invasive animal  species and 36 invasive plant  species of concern have been identified by the government because of their ability to spread across Europe and the UK, and the harm they could cause to the environment. Matt Shardlow, the CEO of the insect charity Buglife, said that while domestic efforts to tackle invasive species such as Asian hornets had been commendable, post-Brexit biosecurity rules had not been up to scratch. He explained: “On biosecurity the government has left the door ajar. Asian hornets can arrive in growing material in imported potted plants and soil. Since Brexit the EU has banned the import of soil in pot plants from the UK; however, the UK has put no reciprocal biosecurity measures in place and indeed has recently again delayed addressing control of inward trade. “So as the Asian hornet spreads and proliferates on the continent, we are allowing their continued importation as stowaways into the UK.” While it is possible for large insects to fly across the Channel, experts say it is more likely at least some have arrived in soil from potted plants. A recent study found that the dominant pathway for species invasions is the horticulture trade.  The Windsor framework , which the government put in place to ease trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, also provides an avenue for invasive species to spread. Shardlow said: “The Windsor framework reduces the level of control of the importation of horticultural materials into Northern Ireland, meaning that should Asian hornets colonise the UK the door is open for them to cross the Irish Sea and colonise Ireland. “The framework states that measures to ensure biosecurity of imports of various biological products into Northern Ireland from UK ‘did not reflect any real-world biosecurity risk’ – which is patent nonsense.” A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said: “The UK operates one of the toughest borders in the world in protecting the nation from the introduction of pests and diseases.” “Whilst our analysis shows the arrival of Asian hornets on imported potted plants is very unlikely, we continue to work at speed to locate and investigate any reports of Asian hornets, and urge the public to continue to play their vital role in identifying and reporting them.” Load-Date: August 25, 2023  End of Document
