   Let’s set the bar higher for export targets, says minister thetimes.co.uk November 7, 2023 Tuesday 9:40 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Version:2 Length: 1019 words Byline: Richard Tyler Body   Britain should double the number of exporters it has by 2030, helped by the “benefits of Brexit”, the exports minister has said. Marking the start of international trade week, Lord Offord of Garvel, a Scottish businessman and a minister in the Department for Business and Trade, said the government’s target of achieving £1 trillion in exports by the end of the decade looked achievable and that he saw merit in a more stretching goal. “We are going to get to that relatively easily, I think. We are at £880 billion and, even if you adjust for inflation, we are doing pretty well.” Instead he pointed to the 300,000 companies within the total pool of 2.7 million VAT registered companies that export. “Take out the 10,000 big companies ... basically, we are saying 10 per cent of SMEs are exporting. My view is we should be doubling that to 20 per cent.” His target exceeds that called for by the Institute of Directors in September, which made the case for a 15 per cent target to be adopted as the £1 trillion goal was not “sufficiently stretching”. Offord said the “impetus” for an improvement in Britain’s exporting efforts would partly come from the rise of digital service-based companies, which he said were “born international”, as well as the “benefits of Brexit”. “We reckon even just in the digital channel that over the next ten years there will be an additional 100,000 companies exporting,” he said. “Our economy is 80 per cent services and 20 per cent goods. Our exports are still fifty, fifty because our manufactured goods are so good they go around the world. But the direction of travel is going to be two thirds services, one third goods. “A second impetus is Brexit. We hear all the bad news about Brexit. It’s now time to turn the dial on this and talk about some of the real benefits of Brexit.” He pointed to the UK’s increasing use of digital trade documentation and accession to a trade deal covering growing countries with borders to the Pacific ocean, called the Trans-Pacific Partnership. He acknowledged that UK exporters to the EU had “been punished in terms of friction”, noting the experience of companies he recently visited in south Wales. He met two that had had “real difficulty” in Europe “just with forms. They are making it bloody difficult. It has to be a form with the blue pen for France; a form with a brown pen to Germany; a form with an orange pen to Holland.” Nevertheless Offord said that UK sales volumes to the EU remained strong. He pointed to a report released on Monday from the Institute of Economic Affairs, a free-market think tank, which highlighted how UK goods exports rose by 13.5 per cent to EU countries and 14.3 per cent to non-EU countries between 2019 and 2022, with UK services exports rising by 14.8 per cent to EU countries and 22.1 per cent to non-EU countries over the same period. It concluded: “There has been no real disparity between UK trade with EU and non-EU countries”. Speaking at the launch of the report in London, Kemi Badenoch, the business and trade secretary, had said: “This is why I just don’t agree with the narrative that Brexit has ‘severely damaged’ our economy.” Offord said that international trade with the rest of the world was “going gangbusters”. “The trade flows are tilting east. The message is beginning to get through to our companies that, ‘Do you know what, you don’t need to just focus on Europe anymore, there is a big bad world out there’.” To help established and new exporters across the UK take advantage, Offord said his department was increasing the number of UK-based international trade advisers. “We want to build out that capability to the whole of the United Kingdom. We are now convinced it is working in England so therefore let’s do the same in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales. “There are 160 of them in England, going up to 180 I think, net of 15 for Scotland, nine for Wales and five for Northern Ireland. They are a key piece of the ecosystem here.” His department later clarified that 15 new roles are being recruited, bringing the number to 175. The government took the advisory service in-house in July last year from seven providers, including chambers of commerce, which were being paid £18 million to provide it. At the time, the advisory service had more than 200 staff, including management. It is typically available to exporters with total sales of more than £500,000 a year. William Bain, head of trade policy at the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC), said the decision to in-source the contracts “was a big blow” to its network and called for a refresh of the government’s export strategy. “There is a need to ... examine how the chambers network, as a trusted delivery partner for government, can play a deeper role in driving better UK export performance,” he said. The BCC also called on the government to include a trade and customs bill in today’s King’s Speech. This would enable reforms to the way that public bodies manage data to enable a single trade window, which Offord said would be live in 2025. The new service could mean that companies trading internationally need only submit their information once, with it then shared across government agencies as necessary. Last month a survey by the BCC of 2,000 small and mid-sized exporters (SMEs) found that confidence remained subdued. “Exports continue to languish for many of these firms as the global economy remains under pressure,” it said. Wouter Roels, senior vice-president at FedEx Europe, the logistics company, said that small companies trading across borders were facing “increased uncertainty” and bureaucracy. “Regulation has undoubtedly become more complex — the volume of shipments leaving the EU requiring customs clearance has grown by almost 50 per cent over the last five years,” he said. “EU import and export costs have increased since Brexit, and we’ve seen a shift in UK-EU trade patterns, with more consolidated shipments to reduce the regulatory burden. “But businesses are rewiring their supply chains and adapting, and UK SMEs should still build the capabilities and have the confidence to think cross-border.” Load-Date: November 7, 2023  End of Document
