   London's post-Brexit art market a picture of health The Times (London) August 29, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 471 words Byline: Laura Freeman Body   When Alison Jacques took on her new gallery in Mayfair it was a concrete shell with no floor and no electricity. In October, the transformed 6,000 sq ft space will open with Infinite Potential, an exhibition of work by the American artist Sheila Hicks, who at 89 is the hottest thing in textiles. The title is a good summing up of the UK art market. Jacques is bullish: "I wouldn't be making this move if I didn't have total confidence in London." Even after Brexit? "I'm almost ashamed to say it because I was a staunch remainer," she said. "But if I'm honest we have benefited businesswise. It has been a massive boost for us." Paul Hewitt, director general of the Society of London Art Dealers, is not so sure. "It's tough," he said. "But it's not as bad as we thought it could have been." This year's Art Market Report by Art Basel, the art fair, and UBS, the Swiss bank, shows the UK overtaking China to move into second place in terms of share of the global art market. The US is top with 45 per cent, followed by the UK with 18 per cent, China with 17 per cent and France fourth with 7 per cent. While down from 21 per cent in 2015, the UK's share is up from a low of 17 per cent in 2021 during the pandemic. Anthony Browne, chairman of the British Art Market Federation, said the state of the market post-Brexit was not as "apocalyptic" as feared, but added: "Where the show is going on is the United States. There may be a lot of hype about Paris, but the situation since Brexit isn't a case of 'our loss, Europe's gain'. It's our loss, America's gain." In the run-up to the 2016 referendum, voters were promised bonfires of red tape, liberation from Brussels and a loosening of regulatory corsets. "For years we complained about the EU's tax on imports. Brexit gave us the opportunity to do something about it," Browne said. Import tax on works of art entering the EU is set at 5 per cent. In the UK it is at 5 per cent too, but the administrative burden on a gallery is worse than before because now, Browne said, "there's a hurdle here and a hurdle in Europe". There is no import tax on works entering the US or Hong Kong. Browne said: "If you could say 'look, there is no import tax', it's immediately more attractive. Here's something that would be a shot in the arm and the one thing that would put clear, blue water between us and our competitors in the European time zone." VAT on art imports generated an estimated £18.8 million in 2021. Melanie Gerlis, editor-at-large at The Art Newspaper and author of Art as an Investment?, said the burden of administration from import taxes, shipping paperwork and compliance with anti-money laundering rules was "very hard work for these tiny businesses. What used to take three days now takes three weeks ... we're insanely good at the art business. Why wouldn't you support that?" Load-Date: August 29, 2023  End of Document
