   Lord Heseltine: Cameron’s return has saved Tories from ‘great lurch to the Right’ telegraph.co.uk November 14, 2023 Tuesday 1:25 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:3 Length: 472 words Byline: By Amy Gibbons Highlight: Former PM’s shock appointment as Foreign Secretary could stabilise party and restore relationships with Europe, says Brexit critic Body   Tory grandee Lord Heseltine has said Lord Cameron’s return to the political front line  has saved the Conservatives from a “great lurch to the Right”. Lord Heseltine, a Brexit critic and former deputy prime minister to Sir John Major said the shock appointment  was “the best piece of news we’ve had for some considerable time on the domestic front”. He said the former Tory leader  would bring a sense of perspective and integrity to the role of Foreign Secretary, with his return sending a signal to people “dismayed” by the recent direction of travel. Installing Lord Cameron in the post has “stabilised” the party after a swing “further and further to the Right ”, he added. Lord Cameron accepted a peerage  to take up the role in Rishi Sunak’s reshuffle on Monday, ending almost seven years in the political wilderness after he quit No 10 following the 2016 Brexit referendum. The Cabinet shake-up, in which Suella Braverman was sacked as home secretary , sparked a backlash from the Tory Right, with Dame Andrea Jenkyns, a prominent Boris Johnson supporter, submitting a letter of no confidence in the Prime Minister. She accused Mr Sunak of opting to “purge the centre-Right from his Cabinet”, while Lord Frost, the former Brexit negotiator , said the reshuffle showed he was taking the country “back to the past”. Lord Heseltine told the BBC’s The Today Podcast: “David Cameron played an important role in saving the Tory party from the last great lurch to the Right which we saw after 1997, and he eventually managed to secure a majority for the Conservatives from the centre ground. “He is now back, and that will send a signal to a very wide number of people who have been dismayed by the way that the last few prime ministers have taken the party further and further to the Right. David as now Foreign Secretary has stabilised the position.” Lord Heseltine also said it was his “sincere hope” that Lord Cameron will be “seen to restore our relationships with Europe”. Theresa Villiers, a Brexiteer and former Cabinet minister, described Lord Cameron as “tremendously talented” and said she was sure he would be a “great asset to the Government”. But she said people would be looking for assurances that he “accepts where we are as a party now, both on Brexit and on China”, adding: “When he was at No 10, the political landscape was very different on both those issues. So people will be looking for reassurance on that and I would expect he would be able to give them that.” Baroness Morgan of Cotes, the last person to run a government department from the Lords, said: “I do think there’s a distinction over the Foreign Office – it’s a big international stage because you’re out there travelling the world and everything else … the ministerial team in the House of Commons are more than capable of picking up all the issues there.” Load-Date: November 14, 2023  End of Document
