   MEP Josianne Cutajar in discussions at the World Travel Market in London The Malta Independent November 11, 2023  Copyright 2023 Standard Publications Ltd Provided by  Syndigate.info,an  Albawaba.com company All Rights Reserved  Length: 515 words Body   This week, MEP Josianne Cutajar participated in the renowned World Travel Market (WTM) event held in London. As a member of the European Parliament's Committee on Transport and Tourism, Cutajar's presence at the event emphasised her belief in the importance of working towards enhanced connectivity and travel arrangements between the UK and the EU following the termination of free movement as a result of Brexit. As a keynote speaker on the panel discussion "Post-Brexit Travel Movements" MEP Cutajar kicked off her address by stating that "coming from Malta, the EU's smallest member state, we've had our fair share of connectivity challenges, but that didn't stop us from maintaining a strong tourism sector hosting visitors from all four corners of the continent and beyond. In a similar fashion, the EU and UK can address the challenges of Brexit by forging strong and mutually beneficial arrangements." The MEP highlighted that the EU-UK travel landscape cannot simply be defined by Brexit but must also consider the challenges of the post-pandemic world, of climate effects, as well as of a more volatile geopolitical landscape that lends itself to a heightened threat-level both physical and in cyberspace. Reminding the audience of the shared values and common past which continue to bind the EU and UK together, Dr Cutajar emphasised the need for further dialogue to ensure that, while respecting the sovereignty of both sides, we do our utmost to pragmatically further align our policies in areas of significant added value. In line with this, she also mentioned her hope that Britain will one day re-join the Erasmus programme, as well as the importance of cross-consultation and sharing of experiences in the upcoming revision of the Travel Package legislation by both Brussels and Westminster. Cutajar also emphasised the importance of seamlessly implementing the new European (ETIAS) and British (ETA) travel authorisation schemes, with the aim of ensuring a swift and secure solution offering peace of mind and efficiency to EU and British travellers alike. However, she warned of the risks of scams in cyberspace and the importance of stepping up collective awareness and campaigns against misinformation about these schemes. "Indeed, an essential key to combatting not only misinformation, but various potential hiccups in the post-Brexit reality, lies in plugging the skills gap and tackling labour shortages on both sides of the Channel" MEP Cutajar stated. She also underlined that new travel requirements following Brexit do represent a challenge, but also an opportunity for the uptake of digital and tech solutions that could facilitate checks, security and the overall travel experience. During her visit at the WTM, Cutajar also toured the different exhibitor's stands, including the VisitMalta stand, as well as those of key industry players, with whom she had fruitful conversations on the state of the tourism sector and the importance of a more coordinated approach that can help the local and European tourism sector strengthen its competitiveness on a global level. Load-Date: November 11, 2023  End of Document
