   Migrant move hints at Labour plans to take UK closer to EU; Analysis The Daily Telegraph (London) September 14, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 386 words Byline: Ben Riley-Smith Body   Labour will not reverse Brexit. That is the message which will be preached by the shadow cabinet as the general election looms closer. But so too will another message: Labour wants a closer relationship with the European Union. Changes will be made to improve ties with the Continent. It is in the space between those points - that Brexit is staying but the Brexit delivered by the Tories will be changed - that the fate of UK-EU relations under a Labour government lies. Sir Keir Starmer is in the Hague today, outlining more about how he would drive down small boat crossings. Next week, it will be handshakes and smiles with Emmanuel Macron in Paris, as the French president strays from diplomatic etiquette by hosting the Opposition leader. Neither are proof of a secret plot to take Britain into the EU's orbit. A small boat plan is an electoral necessity. Glad-handing a foreign leader is useful optics for a politician hoping to become a national leader. But in tone and feel, Sir Keir's visit to France will be a very dierent one from the Brexit wars of not too long ago; expect to hear plenty of mutual respect, and references to like-minded allies. Labour does have a wider plan to re-engage with the Continent - one short on detail but heavy with potential signicance. There is the stated goal of negotiating an agricultural deal, one that would likely lower trade barriers to allow both sides' farmers to sell more into each other's markets. As with all things Brexit, the devil is in the detail. Will it mean accepting agricultural rules and regulations set by Brussels in return for the trade boost? Probably so. If Sir Keir gets into power, this will prove to be a fascinating microcosm of future attempts to "x Brexit" - the Labour Party's phrase - and where public opinion lies on the topic. Sir Keir voted to remain in the EU in the 2016 referendum. He led Labour's push to secure a second referendum. But that was in the past, the Labour leader argues. The country has decided, Brexit is done. But it does suggest an instinctive belief in the benefits of boosting trade, even if it means giving up a little more sovereignty. Should Sir Keir be handed half a decade in power, those little steps back towards the EU may well turn into strides that are more signicant than Labour HQ likes to project right now. Load-Date: September 14, 2023  End of Document
