   Ministers have used Brexit as pretext for unholy power grab i-news June 24, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 592 words Byline: Paul Waugh Body   Seven long years on from the EU referendum, it's not been a great week for Brexit backers in the UK. First, we learnt inflation and interest-rate increases are higher here than in Europe. Then the Covid inquiry was told that preparation for a no-deal Brexit was "a really major consumer of resources" that took precedence over planning for a pandemic. And the bad news kept on coming. Joe Biden blocked the Defence Secretary from leading Nato because we're not part of the EU. A poll found that a fifth of Leave voters want to rejoin the EU single market and 13 per cent back rejoining the EU in full. Perhaps most telling of all, the pollster Peter Kellner produced analysis showing that even if no one changed their mind, Rejoin would decisively beat Stay Out in any new referendum. Why? Because since 2016, four million older people (who were mainly anti-EU) have died and five million younger people (mainly pro-EU) reached voting age. But there was another fly in the ointment for Tory MPs who wanted to celebrate the anniversary of "Independence Day" by passing a landmark piece of legislation. The Retained EU Law Bill would have finally become law in time for the Brexit birthday yesterday if it wasn't for the House of Lords deciding one more time to get the Commons to think again about its far-reaching implications. This troubled legislation was the brainchild of Jacob Rees-Mogg, who planned a "bonfire" of EU regulations to be copied into British law after Brexit; 4,000 would have expired automatically on New Year's Eve unless specifically kept or replaced by ministers. Business, Brussels and the Civil Service all saw the dangers so in one of his bolder bits of pragmatism, Rishi Sunak decided to scrap the "sunset" clause. The Trade Secretary, Kemi Badenoch (inset), defied the anger that the U-turn sparked among some Brexiteer backbenchers, telling them "I'm certainly not an arsonist. I'm a Conservative". But even though parts of the bill have been watered down, it retains sweeping powers for ministers that really do alarm those in all political parties who believe in parliamentary sovereignty. Central to the concerns are what the Hansard Society calls plans to give ministers "do anything we want" powers to replace any EU law with an alternative that they consider appropriate. Most importantly, even some Brexiteer peers believe this bill undermines Brexit itself: it lets ministers, rather than the people through their Parliament, "take back control" from Brussels. The former judge Baroness Butler-Sloss pointed out this week that successive governments have executed a power grab from Parliament using Henry VIII powers and secondary legislation instead of primary legislation. "It seems extraordinary to me that the House of Commons has not yet appeared to realise the extent to which it, quite apart from us, is being marginalised," she said. Smarter Conservatives realise their party may regret it if these sweeping powers are wielded by a Labour government. Yet no government should be given such untrammelled powers. We've all seen of late that Boris Johnson's Brexit has acted like a slow puncture to our economy, silent at first but now getting very loud indeed. A similarly chronic wearing away of the rights of our Parliament is taking place. While it may take years before we hold another referendum on rejoining the EU, let's hope it won't take as long before MPs wake up to reassert their - and our - rights. Paul Waugh is i's chief political commentator A chronic wearing away of the rights of our Parliament is taking place Load-Date: June 23, 2023  End of Document
