   More moderation and a shift towards Europe CE Noticias Financieras English November 14, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 968 words Body   Like those gambling addicts who, after having lost their shirts, ask the casino for a loan, Rishi Sunak has gone all out to put the last chips on the roulette wheel of next year's British elections. In a Formula 1-like spin, he has dismissed the far-right Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, and brought out of the shadows the socially moderate former Prime Minister David Cameron, who - after making the historic mistake of calling the Brexit referendum - ran a dispirited and soulless campaign for the United Kingdom to remain in the European Union. If the move smacks of a desperate move, that's because it is. It has not worked for Prime Minister Sunak to present himself as a competent technocrat cleaning house after the chaos of Boris Johnson and Liz Truss, nor as the anti-establishment rebel who was going to change the way things were done, nor as the man who would fix the economy, reduce immigration and public health waiting lists. So he has opted for relative moderation and de-emphasized Brexit, so far the first (and toxic) commandment of the Conservative Party. Sometimes life offers dilemmas, and Sunak has found himself with one that he has been thinking about for some time: either to appear weak and keep the Minister of the Interior, Suella Braverman (who could be from Vox), in her post, despite the constant provocations, or to charge her and irritate the most radical and pro-Brexit wing of the Conservatives. He has opted for the latter, and some have immediately raised a hue and cry. Sunak implicitly assumes the enormous difficulty of winning the election and is trying to save the furniture. Braverman has not been accepted to resign, but has been dismissed with the full force of the law for disavowing the police - just the opposite of what a Home Secretary is supposed to do - on the eve of Saturday's big pro-Palestinian demonstration, accusing them of favoring left-wing groups, Islamists and movements like #BlackLivesMatter over English nationalists. He thus added fuel to the fire and encouraged neo-Nazi and fascist organizations to show up in London over the weekend ready to pick a fight, as indeed they did (Scotland Yard arrested more than a hundred of them). It was not the first provocation of Braverman, who many political analysts believe that he had been seeking his exit from the Government for some time in order to be able to say everything he thinks without any hindrance in search of the leadership of the most ultra-right wing of the Tories. He does not hide his ambition to lead the group after the more than possible defeat in next year's elections (they are 24 points behind Labour in the latest poll, despite the internal divisions in the opposition over the Gaza conflict), and for that he should defeat the also minister Kemi Badenoch and perhaps the inspirer of Brexit, Nigel Farage, recycled in television commentator. Particularly conflicting are Braverman's positions on immigration, speaking of the "arrival of a tsunami of foreigners" who dilute the country's cultural identity (despite the fact that her parents come from East Africa and Mauritius) and giving wings to the conspiracy theory of replacement, according to which whites are being replaced in the West by people of other races. Rather than a British conservative, she looks like a Trumpist or a standard-bearer of the Tea Party that radicalized U.S. Republicans with its flag, family and religion slogan. Braverman is positioning herself to lead the Conservatives to the extreme right after the elections. But it is not only his positions on immigration that are controversial. Last week he proposed banning charities from donating tents to the homeless because, in his view, sleeping rough "is a free lifestyle choice and not a necessity, and we should not encourage it." Despite his origins, he considers multiculturalism a scourge and an aberration. Braverman's dismissal has precipitated a reshuffle of the Cabinet, with changes in other ministries (Health, Environment, Housing...) and the move of James Cleverly, head of Foreign Affairs, theoretically a supporter of Brexit but not a militant, to the Home Office (Interior). But Sunak's big coup, as if he had kicked the slot machine, is the resurrection of David Cameron, who led the country from 2010 to 2016. There is only one precedent of a premier returning to government as a simple minister: Sir Alec Douglas-Home, who did so under Edward Heath. It is a huge turnaround. From prioritizing the vote of Brexit supporters and socially conservative former Labour voters seduced by Johnson, Sunak has moved on to try to minimize damage and at least keep on board the moderate Conservatives in the south of England who are threatening to switch to the Liberal Democrats. He has moved the deck chairs and ordered the band to play different music, but the iceberg is still in place and the ship is moving steadily towards it in the middle of the night. Cameron adds weight to British foreign policy amid Gaza and Ukraine conflicts Cameron, who has been made a fast-track lord in order to join the Cabinet, immediately brings specific weight to UK foreign policy in the midst of the conflicts in Ukraine and Gaza. He is very pro-Israeli, but with enough authority to tell it like it is to Beniamin Netanyahu, if the time comes. An Atlanticist, he wants to prioritize "relations with our allies" (Joe Biden is not happy about Brexit because of its repercussions on Northern Ireland). When he was premier, he proclaimed a "golden age of relations with China" that was short-lived. Some gambling addicts sign a self-imposed ban on entering casinos so as not to be tempted. But Sunak is not one of those. With almost everything lost in the electoral roulette, he went to the window and signed a promissory note in exchange for a handful of chips. Load-Date: November 15, 2023  End of Document
