   Nationalism is in retreat in Scotland; TORIES IN MANCHESTER GOVE: UNION 'STRENGTHENED' The Sun (England) October 4, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 490 words Byline: RACHEL WATSON Body   MICHAEL Gove last night told the Tory party conference that Scots nationalism is "in retreat". The Levelling Up Secretary also vowed to take the fight to Labour at the General Election ? as he dubbed Sir Keir Starmer a political "jellyfish". His blasts came as senior Conservative sources claimed they could gain seats north of the border next year. In his flagship speech in Manchester, Mr Gove said: "The Union has been strengthened ? nationalism is in retreat in Scotland." The Aberdeen-born minister added: "We will fight at the next election for a kingdom more united, more confident and more ambitious." Despite his comments, the SNP are still polling as the biggest party north of the border. And support for independence remains around 50 per cent. Last year the Scottish Government lost a High Court bid to allow Holyrood to call a legally binding IndyRef2 ? as the powers relating to this are reserved to Westminster. But First Minister Humza Yousaf has indicated he will seek to start talks to leave the UK if the Nats win the most seats in Scotland. Labour and the Tories have both said they will not grant a second vote on splitting the UK or accept a so-called de facto referendum. Mr Gove also used his speech to attack Sir Keir. He branded him "the jellyfish of British politics" ? as "transparent, spineless and swept along by the tide". Mr Gove claimed the rival party's leader was "never prepared to stand up for our nation", citing his stance on remaining in the EU. He pledged: "We will take the fight to Labour. The party of Jeremy Corbyn and his self-proclaimed friend Sir Keir Starmer ? who was against Brexit, then wanted to accept Brexit, then wanted a second referendum on Brexit, then said he wanted to make Brexit work. "Then he wanted a Brexit which was identical to EU membership. "Saying, as he always does, whatever he thought people in the audience wanted to hear." Mr Gove added: "Under Sir Keir, Labour is the party of equivocation, procrastination, prevarication." At the weekend, the UK Government sparked anger from SNP ministers after it was announced £140million of funding will go directly to seven Scots councils without consulting Holyrood. Mr Gove said that under the Tories "no community is left behind". Scots Tory boss Douglas Ross claimed this week he's "very confident" his party will make election gains. Last month a YouGov poll put the Conservatives on just 16 per cent in Westminster voting intentions, up slightly from 15 per cent. But that was well behind Labour on 27 per cent and the SNP on 38 per cent. And last night SNP MP Tommy Sheppard said: "The Tories are living in cloud cuckoo land if they think Scots are crying out for more Westminster control at a time when Brexit and the Tory cost of living crisis are hammering household incomes and costing Scotland's economy billions of pounds." rachel.watson@thesun.co.uk Starmer is jellyfish of British politics ..transparent, spineless & swept by tide Graphic    Ballot vow ... Mr Gove will 'take fight' to LabourSeats claim ... Mr RossBrexit blast ... Sir Keir Load-Date: October 4, 2023  End of Document
