   NatWest has now become the nal victim of the bitter Brexit wars; The Coutts dossier on Farage exposed the deep divisions that still exist over the UK leaving the EU The Daily Telegraph (London) July 27, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 21 Length: 1046 words Body   How could they have been so stupid? That was the question on everyone's lips in the City yesterday morning. How could NatWest Group have so mismanaged things as to give Nigel Farage - yes, Nigel Farage of all people - such an open goal? For this is not just a story about woke capitalism gone mad, or even the chief executive's failure to realise - until it was too late - the potential damage to reputation from the Farage ban. Nor is it solely about the subsequent chain of miscommunication that led Dame Alison Rose to break client condentiality rules by naively - or perhaps disingenuously, we simply don't know - dismissing the aair as an entirely commercial matter. It is also a story about the deep divisions that continue to ripple through the country over Brexit. For Mr Farage does not need merely to suspect that this was the primary reason for getting rid of him; it was down there in black and white in the myriad references to his Brexit campaigning that littered the Coutts dossier describing him as a "xenophobic" and "disingenuous grifter" who panders to racists. Had Mr Farage dreamt up the whole bizarre sequence of missteps himself, he could scarcely have come up with a better way of discrediting a board of directors as packed full of Remainer, corporate establishment types. Rightly or not, the aair only seems to conrm suspicions of an elitist conspiracy to poison the whole Brexit endeavour, or otherwise punish its cheerleaders. And here I speak as a Remainer myself, who like the NatWest Bank chairman, Sir Howard Davies, continues to think of Brexit as "a signicant mistake". What must be so galling to the likes of Sir Howard is that they have no one to blame for allowing such a narrative to take hold but themselves. Mr Farage and his supporters can reasonably conclude that it is hatred of Brexit that has clouded the bank's judgment. None of this is to argue that there is no case for the defence at all, or that the former Brexit Party leader is right to demand the resignation of the entire board. In all but the events of the last few months, Dame Alison appears to have been a competent chief executive who has done a remarkably good job in restoring the bank's sense of purpose after the near-death experience of the nancial crisis 15 years ago. But no one is indispensable and her departure shouldn't in theory have any impact on the bank's ongoing success. Many people said after the nancial crisis, with some justication, that it wouldn't have happened had banks been run by women, so when Sir Howard handpicked Dame Alison for the job, it seemed the perfect choice. The testosterone-driven, gung ho recklessness of Fred "the shred" Goodwin was to be replaced by fastidious attention to risk, together with a caring, sharing culture of inclusiveness that put the customer rst, even if it plainly didn't extend to the likes of Mr Farage. Yet despite the crass stupidity of his expulsion, it is not in itself evidence of the sort of systemic failure that might cause investors and depositors to run for the hills. Banks are particularly fragile animals that depend vitally on public and nancial market trust. Anything that upsets this is likely to be destabilising. To dismiss the entire board would undoubtedly be just such an event. You couldn't hope for a better chairman than Sir Howard, who has been very much part of the renewed sense of self condence that NatWest has enjoyed in recent years. His only obvious fault was perhaps not to have gripped the situation earlier when Mr Farage, a consummate campaigner, rst disclosed that he had mysteriously been axed. Yet as already announced, Sir Howard has served his time and is going in any case in a year's time. To hound him out early just when the bank needs his skills most would be a particularly destructive thing to do. That's not to say it won't happen. This story has got legs, as they say. Once a corporate crisis has established itself, it's notoriously dicult to contain it. And this is perhaps why the board was so reluctant to re Dame Alison. It risks making a bad situation even worse by upsetting the entire apple cart. The case for the defence lies largely in the idiotic "Politically Exposed Person" " (Pep) regime that banks feel obliged to apply to their high-prole customers. There is some debate over how much of a regulatory requirement this really is but, ever since the nancial crisis, banks have been walking on eggshells so there is a tendency to overcompensate for fear of being hauled up before the Beak. As Mr Farage has pointed out, this has resulted in some particularly oppressive decision-making, which has seen thousands of people de-banked for no obvious reason. Feelings about this issue run particularly high in the Muslim community, where many customers think they have been unfairly targeted. It also speaks to wider public concern over intrusive modern-day banking. Big Brother seems to have established itself in 21st century form not just through the data mining of social media, but also "know your customer" banking rules. In any case, Coutts considered itself obliged by the Pep regime to constantly monitor Farage for evidence of nefarious activity. The expense of doing so was judged to render him uncommercial as a client. It is, however, quite a leap from thinking him not worth the candle - lots of banking customers are uncommercial - to cancelling him entirely. The dossier briey considered the reputational damage that might arise from this action, but then bizarrely came to the wrong conclusion. In constantly citing Mr Farage's association with Brexit, as if this was in itself a stain on his character, they opened the doors to today's ood of condemnation. Some might sympathise with what Coutts did, such is the degree of ill feeling that Brexit still engenders in many quarters, but it is clear that the public at large don't. In the end, the Government had to step in and force the NatWest board to act, exercising its powers as a 39pc shareholder, even though this stake is meant to be held at arm's length, free from political interference. It may be smart politics, but is it smart management of the taxpayers' nancial interest? What a mess. 'The aair only seems to conrm suspicions of an elitist conspiracy to poison the Brexit endeavour' Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
