   NIGEL'S MEAT FEAST; CROC & BULL STORY TO WIN MEALS FOR CAMP Grimacing Farage scoffs 4-penis pizza in Bushtucker Trial The Sun (England) November 21, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 14,15 Length: 512 words Byline: FELICITY CROSS Body   NIGEL Farage thrust himself into jungle life by chowing down on a penis pizza. The public selected him to take on I'm A Celebrity's Jungle Pizzeria eating challenge - and he gamely tucked into a medley of members from sheep, bull, pig and crocodile to win stars for camp. Host Ant McPartlin laughed: "Four penises on one slice. You really get value for money in this restaurant. Have you eaten penis before?" Nigel, 59, replied: "Not regularly, no. This would not be top of the list." Steeling himself to scoff the other slices - dubbed "Pepper Groaney", a "Veggie Scarian" and a "Quattro For-gag-io" - alongside YouTuber Nella Rose, Nigel added: "Good God, is this what it's come to?" The ex-Ukip chief's place at the table, screened last night, proved his theory that viewers would enact revenge for Brexit by lining him up for trials - after shamed UK MP Matt Hancock was selected for several last year. Before joining camp, Nigel told us: "Given millions hate me, I do expect people will vote for me to do trials." Nigel's role on the show has provoked fury among some viewers, who raged over his rumoured (EURO)1million fee. But an industry expert told The Irish Sun he likely helped raise as much as (EURO)13million for ITV through ad spend during the launch night alone. Thirty-second slots were sold to the likes of Morrisons, Red Bull and Dior for around (EURO)350,000. Farage became a figure of fun in Sunday night's opening episode with viewers in stitches over how high up his torso he wore his camp trousers. People online compared him to Mr Bean and Simon Cowell. Last night, he also delivered by opening up on Brexit for the first time with Frenchman Fred Sirieix - who has already railed against his views online. Fred asked: "What's the benefit of Brexit, then? If you are an average person from Britain, what's the benefit?" Nigel said: "To know we're independent, we stand on our own two feet in the world." The First Dates maître d' said: "Brexit was about immigration, I remember your poster. I thought it was shameful what you did, Nigel." Nigel replied: "Sadly, sadly it was absolutely true. "It was a poster showing mass young men moving illegally across borders." Fred said: "But it was about demonising migrants." Nigel replied: "No, it wasn't. Brexit is about one thing and one thing only - being selfgoverning. We're in charge. We can get it right, we can make an absolute mess of it but we're the people who make those decisions." Fred said: "I think the average person in the UK has lost out because of what you've done." Nigel said: "They haven't lost out." Both men later took to the Bush Telegraph to admit they were never going to influence the other's thinking. Later, Nigel declared ex-PM Boris Johnson "one of the most disorganised human beings that possibly ever lived" and branded Westminster "chaos" and a "shambles". The show continues tonight at 9pm on ITV1 and ITVX. felicity.cross@the-sun.co.uk Can't I get a full English Brexfast instead? Are you sure it's too late to rerun the public vote, guys? This isn't the Farage vs Johnson contest I had in mind.. Graphic    I'VE BEEN SHAFTED Nigel comes to end of trial he found very hard goingHead to head ... Nella and Nigel Farage face off as the penis food trial gets under way Load-Date: November 21, 2023  End of Document
