   Now the vultures circle to urge a Brexit U-turn Mail on Sunday (London) June 16, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 336 words Byline: Kumail Jaffer Body   ARCH-REMAINERS seized on Boris Johnson's political downfall last night to issue fresh calls for Britain's return to the EU. Former deputy prime minister Lord Heseltine led demands to reverse Brexit following the privileges committee's report. Many of Mr Johnson's former adversaries - including Conservatives he clashed with over their anti-Brexit stance - also chimed in to encourage Tory MPs to endorse the highly-critical report's recommendations. Lord Heseltine, who has repeatedly called for Britain to rejoin the EU, said: 'All of this is about lying in the most senior of public offices - you can't escape from the consequences of that on Brexit. We left the European Union, one of the most regrettable and economically damaging decisions of modern times, on the basis of lies of which Boris Johnson was a principle architect. 'It is a clarion call to begin the process of restoring our relationship with Europe. We are Europeans - there are no credible alternative ways in which to make a success of the British economy.' High-profile Remainer Dominic Grieve, who had the Tory whip withdrawn by Mr Johnson for voting against Brexit, said: 'We know Boris Johnson is a serial liar, and lied through his back teeth about the breaches of the rules in No10. I hope he's gone for good. The country is much better off without him.' Former Cabinet minister David Gauke, who also lost the Tory whip in 2019, said Monday's vote 'will be an important test of whether Conservative MPs are prepared to uphold standards in public life'. And exminister Anna Soubry, who quit the Tory party over Brexit, said: 'Everyone with a Conservative MP should be questioning them as to their record of support for Johnson over the last seven years.' Lord Sugar said: 'Boris Johnson. At last, it has been proved he is a liar. If I lied to my shareholders I would be put in jail.' But former Tory MP Lord Jackson said Partygate was 'revenge for Brexit dressed up as a quasi-judicial process' after Remainers couldn't 'beat him at the ballot box'. Load-Date: June 16, 2023  End of Document
