   On the hook: food exports to EU plunge since Brexit The Independent - Daily Edition June 24, 2023 Saturday First Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Print Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 781 words Byline: ADAM FORREST Body   UK meat and fish exports to the EU have slumped by almost half since Brexit, new analysis of trade figures has revealed. The worrying plunge in food trade comes as Britain marks the seventh anniversary of the referendum result amid growing negativity about Brexit's impact on the economy. Meat exports to EU countries - as measured by weight - declined by 42 per cent from December 2020 to March 2023, according to Labour analysis of government trade data. The shock figures also show a 45 per cent slide in the net mass of fish, crustacean and mollusc exported to Europe over the same period. Sir Keir Starmer's party is demanding a new veterinarydeal with Brussels to ease the "mountain of red tape" faced by British businesses trading with Britain's nearest neighbours. Labour ministers have written to environment secretary Therese Coffey, urging the government to take up the "practical fix" to ease the burden of costly checks which have also caused huge congestion at Dover. Jim McMahon, the shadow environment secretary, blamed the Tory government for a "perfect storm of negligence which has hurt jobs, rocketed prices and damaged our food security". He added: "The Tories have failed at every turn; food producers are saddled with endless red tape and crippling production costs and households are being squeezed on their weekly food shop beyond any limits." The weight of meat exports to EU countries fell from just over 56 million kilograms in December 2020, the month prior to the introduction of the checks, to 34.5 million kilograms. Fish, crustacean and mollusc exports fell fromjust over 27 million kilograms down to 14.7 million kilograms in the same period. But a government source said comparing December 2020 export figures, the month before Brexit, with March 2023 - the last available figures - did not offer a balanced perspective on trade flows because exports were affected by seasonal patterns. Food sector chiefs have joined Labour in calling for a UK-EU veterinary agreement to ease trade barriers, since it would remove the need for extra sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) checks on goods. Business leaders have warned of further pain ahead for Britain's food retailers, with a costly new set of checks on EU imports kicking in from October - including a fee of up to £43 per consignment of food from the bloc. The new charge - outlined in a consultation issued by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs - comes alongside separate fees for customs agents and SPS inspections. Despite ruling out rejoining the single market or customs union, Labour's foreign secretaryDavid Lammyhas hinted that the party's policy could inch forward to forge closer ties with Brussels. Mr Lammy told LBC that the idea of a veterinary deal to ease some food trade issues is a "floor not a ceiling" and said he wants "to hear what business has got to say over the coming months". Former Brussels negotiator Michel Barnier toldThe Independentthat the EU would be willing to thrash out new treaties with the UK in areas like security, defence or development whereBoris Johnson"refused to negotiate". But Mr Barnier also dismissed suggestions that trade barriers could be resolved without membership of the single market or customs union - dashing the hopes of British businesses that have struggled under the new arrangements. Gina Miller, one of the leaders of the Remain campaign, set outa three-year blueprint for how Britain could rejoin the blocinThe Independent, while Tony Blair's think tank has spelt out 10 areas where a closer economic relationship could take shape. More than 50 per cent believe that the UK was wrong to leave the EU, according to a new Deltapoll survey for the Tony Blair Institute. And only 18 per cent of Leave voters believeit's been a success, polling for UK in a Changing Europehas found. Downing Street yesterday rejected the view - shared by former Bank of England governor Mark Carney - that Brexit has helped fuel Britain's inflation crisis. Rishi Sunak's spokesperson said: "Brexit has created a huge number of opportunities for the UK and indeed for businesses that are beneficial for the public," adding that inflation was similar across other European countries. The government has said its proposed charges of £20 to £43per food import consignment were needed under the new regime for post-Brexit checks on imports. "We are currently consulting with the sector and businesses to ensure we take the fairest approach that works for them, while also facilitating the movement of goods into the country and protecting our biosecurity," said a spokesperson. The Independent contacted the government for comment on the meat and fish export figures. Load-Date: June 23, 2023  End of Document
