   People know that independence is the only way back into Europe for Scotland The Courier November 23, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 28 Length: 809 words Byline: Stuart Nicolson Body   It is almost 20 years now since the European Union expanded eastwards to take in a whole swathe of countries, most of which had formerly been part of the Soviet bloc. Almost overnight, these nations went from appearing as underdeveloped, poorer outposts of the continent to having a seat at the top table at one of the richest trading blocs in the world. Being part of the EU has been hugely economically beneficial for these countries. It's worth noting that of those 10 new EU member states, the majority were smaller in population than Scotland, and most had only become independent since 1991. Those are relevant statistics, because the whole question of EU membership, and the viability of a return to the club for an independent Scotland is central to the independence debate here. The Scottish Government last week published a paper which outlined its case for an independent Scotland rejoining the EU. It may not have generated masses of news coverage, but the publication is an important one nevertheless, given that it seeks to outline the benefits of rejoining the EU in a country which voted decisively against Brexit. Opponents of independence, of course, do their best to muddy the waters when it comes to the question of Scotland in the EU. It would take forever, they say. It would all be terribly difficult, they assert - we'd have to "join the queue", we'd be behind Turkey, and so on. All of which makes for easy soundbites and headlines, but which doesn't have a particularly close relationship with the facts. For a start, there is no "queue" to join the EU - it's a claim that was comprehensively shot down by no less than Lord Kerr, the Scots peer and former diplomat seen as a key architect of the EU's Lisbon Treaty, who used rather colourful language to debunk the notion, going on to say that an independent Scotland's accession to the EU would be "very fast". Countries are able to join based on their readiness to do so, according to a list of key criteria. And Scotland, having already been part of the European club for almost 50 years, by definition has previously met all the rules. That being so - and given the Scottish Government's stated aim to remain as closely aligned as possible to EU rules despite Brexit - it shouldn't seem an enormous stretch to suggest that an independent Scotland would be better prepared than any previous candidate country. It's worth remembering how the UK nations voted in 2016. England voted for Brexit and got it. As did Wales. Northern Ireland voted, narrowly, to remain the EU and has been given, rightly given its unique circumstances, the right to remain in the single market for goods. Scotland voted more decisively than any other UK nation, with an overwhelming choice to remain in the EU - but has been told, effectively, to suck it up. That sort of "get stuffed, Scotland" approach might warm the cockles of the heart in a certain brand of unionist politician, but it is a short-sighted and self-defeating stance. Because the truth is that Scotland's departure from the EU against its overwhelming democratic will is an issue that still has the power to drive independence sentiment. The 1997 devolution referendum which delivered the Scottish Parliament saw a pro-Yes vote campaign that for years had fed off a narrative of perceived injustice, specifically the fact that Scotland had voted for home rule in the earlier referendum 18 years previously, but was denied it because of a voter turnout rule. That narrative was a powerful driving factor in securing the parliament we know today. The circumstances now with the independence debate are, of course, very different. But it is possible to detect, in the debate over EU membership, something akin to the same sense of injustice which drove the devolution campaign of the 1990s. People across Scotland may not, on the whole, be mad keen enthusiasts for the European Union. But they are, overwhelmingly, of the view that being taken out of it was a bad move for them, their families and the country as a whole. For everyone without an EU passport, it has taken away the right to live and work freely across borders - something especially keenly felt among younger people. People also know, given Labour's pro-Brexit stance, that independence is the only way back to Europe for Scotland. Many, including some who may not yet be persuaded by independence, are acutely aware of the unfairness which has seen Scotland's decisive vote in 2016 ignored. It's possible, in the polls, to detect a coming together of the pro-independence and anti- Brexit strands of opinion in Scotland, with each potentially driving the other. That overlap has always been there, but it has been getting stronger, and may yet, in time, prove to be a trump card in the battle over the nation's future. Opponents muddy the waters when it comes to Scotland in the EU Graphic    FAST TRACK: Scots peer Lord Kerr reckons an independent Scotland's accession to the EU would be 'very fast'. Load-Date: November 23, 2023  End of Document
