   PM's actions show Brexit has been bad for business i-news August 7, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 568 words Byline: Paul Waugh Body   In journalism as much as politics, summer is often known as "the silly season". With many big players away on a break, newspaper pages are often filled with a mix of the daft and desperate. But on the vexed issue of Brexit, it looks like the Government is treating the long Parliamentary recess as "the sensible season": a quiet time to slip out announcements that suggest an approach to life outside the EU that is more pragmatic than dogmatic. One example is the news that the UK is set to further postpone the introduction of post-Brexit controls on animal and plant products coming from the Continent (inset). As recently as April, ministers had suggested this new regime would start to be rolled out to British ports from October, with physical checks starting in January 2024, and full implementation 10 months later. Now the whole thing is being pushed back, with no new dates. The reason given by Government insiders is "the need to bear down inflation" amid fears that the new system will add costs at the border. That in itself sounds like an admission of something few ministers have ever conceded publicly: Brexit "trade friction" has fuelled inflation. Both the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank and the LSE have estimated that Brexit has already added six per cent to food bills - a sharp reality check to Jacob Rees-Mogg's confident prediction in 2017 that the cost of food and clothing would "come down significantly" once we were free of Brussels' clutches. Last week, the Government, also publicly, finally conceded that it would allow British business to continue to "indefinitely" use the EU's safety mark on goods, the "CE" stamp that reassures consumers. A rival UK safety mark will now quietly wither on the vine. What unites each of these policy shifts is that business has been warning ministers against the huge and needless costs of undoing EU rules and then duplicating them with British alternatives. And perhaps the most revealing insight into all this was a line in the Financial Times that the Chancellor and Prime Minister are so worried about inflation that they are "willing to take on Brexiter orthodoxy - such as 'taking control' of borders and diverging from EU rules - to cut business costs". That feels like a Brexiteer PM and a former Remainer Chancellor agreeing the priority now is to avoid duplication - a far cry from Boris Johnson's "divergence" narrative. But some British sectors and needs are very different from those in the EU's 27 varied states. It's in areas like financial services (including fintech), robotics and gene editing where "divergence" makes more sense if it allows start-ups to flourish. It's even possible that Brussels will copy our regulatory experiments if they lead to success, part of a "diverge to converge" approach. The new pragmatism from Jeremy Hunt and Rishi Sunak is a welcome shift away from the "performative divergence" of some Brexiteers. And from trade to immigration, the Government has "taken back control" of our borders in only a theoretical sense. Forced to confront the hard realities of business costs, it is by its actions quietly admitting that some of the old ways weren't so bad. But we should all be grateful that ministers are realising that it's summertime and the leaving isn't easy. Paul Waugh is i's chief political commentator The new pragmatism is a welcome shift away from the 'performative divergence' of some Brexiteers Load-Date: August 7, 2023  End of Document
