   Polls show Brexit regrets at all-time high - it's not too late for an about-turn; LETTERS Irish Independent August 9, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 299 words Body   Brexit fantasies are being superseded by unpalatable Brexit reality. The UK government has again been forced to postpone plans to "take back control of our borders" because they simply don't work. Two years into Brexit, the UK still has no customs regime in place for EU food imports. Jacob Rees-Mogg arrogantly and erroneously claimed Brexit would reduce food costs by 20pc. However, it has become clear that - because the UK no longer recognises EU safety standards - red tape has actually increased food prices and significantly contributed to the inordinately high UK inflation figures. Rishi Sunak's government is close to conceding the hard-Brexit vision is fundamentally unworkable. All they can do is mask their chronic incompetence by continually kicking the proverbial can (customs deadline) down the road. The lack of a customs regime is a potential public health risk. The UK is not checking anything that comes into the country from the EU. We also have the Windsor Framework fiasco. So much for "taking back control". Rees-Mogg will argue that the answer to this problem is to buy cheaper food products from outside the EU, but that food is produced to significantly lower animal hygiene and welfare standards. None of this would have happened if the UK had accepted the EU's safety standards. It's time for its government - and the opposition - to accept that the UK needs to find a new way forward. Realignment with EU standards seems the obvious solution. This arrangement would facilitate the import of higher-quality food products from Europe at a reasonable price, a win-win situation. Polls show Brexit regret is at an alltime high. They cannot be ignored. The public is allowed to change its mind. The UK must escape from its democratic dystopia. George Workman Donabate, Co Dublin Load-Date: October 31, 2023  End of Document
