   Post-Brexit checks on food imports 'will push up prices' i-news August 30, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 367 words Byline: Arj Singh Body   Post-Brexit checks on food coming into the UK from the European Union will push up prices, the Government has admitted. The Cabinet Office confirmed yesterday that the controls were being delayed again and will not be fully implemented until October 2024, as Rishi Sunak attempts to bear down on stubbornly high inflation. But the Government estimated that the checks will add 0.2 per cent to the UK's food inflation rate over three years. Professor Anand Menon, the director of the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank, said the delay would mean that "prices don't rise and product choice is maintained" for now, amid the cost of living crisis. But once they are brought in, "it will have an inflationary impact on price and it will potentially reduce choice because you are making it more expensive to import goods from the EU". He added: "For some EU exporters it won't be worth the hassle. Evidence to date indicates that whilst overall trade volumes have held up better than expected, a lot of small firms have dropped out of the market altogether - that will be the same. "Big suppliers will have the resources to deal with the paperwork and the margins to allow them to get by anyway. "It's the more small, bespoke, speciality cheese or ham exporters that will bear the brunt." The British Chambers of Commerce warned that the controls would add to "cost and bureaucracy". Animal and plant health controls will be phased in over the next year. This is the fifth delay to the checks, which the EU already has in place for UK exports to the continent. The Cabinet Office said the new "border target operating model" would apply the same security and biosecurity controls for imports from around the world, including applying these to the EU for the first time and "using Brexit freedoms" to simplify checks. Brexit hotel 'must go' A Tory donor has been told to demolish all or part of his five-star hotel that hosted the signing of the Brexit deal. Runnymede Borough Council issued a planning enforcement notice for Surinder Arora's Fairmont Windsor Park Hotel last month. Mr Arora has now been told to tear down all or part of the luxury hotel in Egham, Surrey, after an extra wing was installed without permission. Load-Date: August 30, 2023  End of Document
