   Private bank bosses divided over Brexit Mail on Sunday (London) July 20, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 6 Length: 289 words Byline: Andrew Levy Body   THE Coutts boss who handled Nigel Farage's account is a staunch Remainer who believes Brexit damaged the economy. Camilla Stowell, the bank's managing director and head of private and commercial clients who puts diversity at the heart of the business, has been Mr Farage's point of contact and replied on behalf of the lender to his subject access request. In contrast, Coutts chief executive Peter Flavel was relaxed about the UK's exit from the EU, stating in 2019 that a '(Jeremy) Corbyn government is something that worries our clients at the moment, much more than Brexit'. He added: 'We advise them not to make decisions on political risk but economic reality.' Mr Farage told The Daily Telegraph that he had several 'very condescending' phone calls and emails with Ms Stowell after he was informed about the closure of his account. He said the top executive, who insisted his account was being closed due to 'commercial reasons', asked him why he could not open an account with Revolut. Coutts refused to comment on her role in Mr Farage's bank closure, but Ms Stowell has previously suggested that issues involving clients are referred to her. In an interview with The Purpose Made Podcast last summer, she said: 'Anybody who looks after, advises, serves, engages, with clients end to end across the business, whether those are international or UK clients, come into my world, which is great.' When asked whether there needed to be a 'conversation sooner or later in respect of Brexit' and the economy, she laughed and revealed she voted Remain. Ms Stowell said: 'Personally, I was a Remainer. So I fear that, yes, we know that Brexit is having an impact, but we can't really quantify it because there are so many forces at play as well.' Graphic    Chief executive: Peter Flavel Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
