   Pushtucker trial; Fans urged to see through Farage's 'affable clown' act & not vote for him Daily Record and Sunday Mail December 2, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 16,17 Length: 655 words Byline: SOPHIE HUSKISSON Body   THIS might not be the vote leave plea Nigel Farage had in mind… But some MPs, furious the Brexit fan is even in the jungle, are urging viewers not to vote for him, claiming his affable manof-the-people act masks a sinister side. As voting for your favourite celebs is set to begin, they recalled Farage's anti-migrant "breaking point" poster during his 2016 Brexit campaign showing queues of desperate refugees. RIGHT Reform Labour's Nadia Whittome said: "ITV should never have given him a platform to launder his reputation and I would urge anyone considering voting to keep him on to think twice. to among become the show. year-old This struggled in the a phase but it line. She has may make it in if the next well." "From the racist undertones of his Brexit campaigning, to the climate denialism he's pushed, Farage is not some affable clown but a poisonous influence on our society." EastEnder my little have Fellow MP Kim Johnson added: "People should remember where Farage came from, what he's said and what he's been responsible for. It was him who helped peddle that racist narrative. In 2016, we saw a hike in race hate crime as a result. The fact he's reportedly been paid £1.5million is just atrocious. Kick him out of there so he doesn't get airtime." Farage is now a GB News presenter and "honorary president" of Reform UK, formerly the Brexit Party. Leader Richard Tice last week refused to rule out his pal making a comeback in the party and Farage has even boasted he could be Tory boss by 2026. WINGER boss Tice His desire for attention on I'm a Celebrity has become clear, openly admitting to his campmate Grace Dent he wanted to do more Bushtucker trials to get "25 per cent of airtime". Lib Dem MP Munira Wilson said: "He's gone from not being elected to Parliament, to not being elected for Bushtucker Trials. "The stench of his personal failure has followed him into the jungle. "Voters have rejected him before and I am sure that they will again." Nightly eviction votes are to begin by the end of the weekend, providing no more contestants quit camp. The girlfriend of Nigel Farage has hit out at his calling Nella Rose a campmates, "snowflake" and Fred Sirieix "rude". Laure Ferrari, who like Fred is French, blasted the First Dates star, who has criticised Farage for his part in Brexit. And YouTuber Rose got both barrels for tackling her partner, 59, over issues including immigration. Ferrari, 44, told GB News: "Fred annoyed me. Isn't it a bit rude to lecture the British electorate about the way the British people voted in 2016?" Turning to Nella, she said: "I think she epitomises that snowflake generation where they are told that they should be offended by every little thing." This is no way to treat rats… locking them inside a dingy drain with Nigel Farage. He was one of five campers on the latest Grim Gutter trial trying to get stars. Nella was put in with cockroaches, Tony and Nick got snakes and Sam toads. As one beast slithered over him, Tony declared: "He's massive." Nick, Sam and Tony got their two stars, Farage did not get any and Nella quit before the end of the trial. She said: "I've last is done cockroaches before, that's why I was so angry that I had them again." Farage said of his brush with the poor rodents in the challenge: "It's nice to know what the British public think of me by sending in rats." said: "ITV given Josie Gibson is struggling to cope with jungle life, with fears among the ITV crew that she could become the third contestant to quit the show. One source said of the 38-year-old This Morning host: "She has really struggled in the last couple of days. It may just be a phase but it is worrying so far from the finish line. She has seen others walk away too which may make it easier for her to throw the towel in if the next couple of days don't go well." Last night, Josie told EastEnder Danielle Harold: "I just miss my little boy [Reggie]. I shouldn't have ever left him this long." Graphic    RIGHT WINGER Reform boss TiceLOOK.. A RAT Farage in the drain yesterday Load-Date: December 2, 2023  End of Document
