   Rishi Sunak's UK government walks a tightrope over plan to expel migrants to Africa CE Noticias Financieras English December 12, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1123 words Body   Civil war broke out in the British Conservative Party and Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's position is in jeopardy. If his immigration bill to send asylum seekers to Rwanda fails, the defeat could be read as a vote of confidence and the kingdom would go to an immediate general election. In a major test of his authority, the prime minister will go ahead with a vote on emergency legislation on Tuesday. Despite the threat of a rebellion by dozens of conservative MPs, who say the bill does not go far enough. The opposition is led by the parliamentary Tory far-right and is not dissimilar to Brexit. They are nostalgic for former Prime Minister Boris Johnson, to the alarm of the party's traditionalists. Rishi Sunak thus faces a mass rebellion by right-wing Tory MPs after the government warned that his radical demands on the Rwanda migration plan risk sacrificing Britain's "tradition of liberty and justice." The vote More than 40 MPs agreed to abstain or vote against, enough to quash the bill to Rwanda unless Sunak offered new concessions. They said the legislation needs "major surgery or replacement." Debate will begin at around 12:30 p.m. (British time) before the vote early Tuesday afternoon. Earlier, the prime minister hosted a breakfast meeting with 20 prominent right-wing MPs in Downing Street in an attempt to win their support. Cabinet members and Tory MPs after breakfast with Sunak. Photo: AP The defeat would represent the first time the government has lost such a vote since 1986, when Tory MPs defeated an attempt by Margaret Thatcher to end Sunday's trade restrictions. The government faces defeat if 57 Conservatives abstain or 29 vote against the legislation. The Rwanda Bill The bill to deport asylum seekers was declared illegal by the British Supreme Court because Rwanda was not considered "a safe country." Again on the charge, Britain signed another agreement last week giving more guarantees to asylum seekers in Rwanda, such as the right to leave the country or be heard by a court. But the law violates the European human rights court, which Winston Churchill helped establish after World War II. They want a tougher bill A Home Office assessment of the risk of individual legal appeals has revealed that migrants could delay their deportation to Rwanda for more than a year. So far they have failed to deport anyone to Rwanda and thousands are living in hotels paid for by the Interior Ministry. Some were housed on a raft brought from Nordic countries called Bibby Stockholm. On Tuesday, one of these migrants allegedly committed suicide on board. Police were investigating the incident on Tuesday.  Anchored in the port of Dorset, the raft was rented to accommodate irregular migrants who had just arrived in the kingdom. The Home Office document, marked "officially sensitive," from September estimated the threat of individual legal challenges, which would blight deportation flights during the implementation of the government's Illegal Migration Act. It suggests that successive delays as migrants take their appeal, through each stage of the legal system, could lead to delays of between 239 and 420 days. Downing Street insisted that individual appeals under the new Rwanda Bill would only be allowed on the basis of "serious and irreversible harm" and it was unusual that they would ever reach the Court of Appeal. In a direct response to right-wing conservatives on Monday, the government issued a summary of its legal position, which said it had allowed people to bring legal challenges to defend their rights and freedoms "even in times of war." It said blocking all legal challenges would be a violation of international law. To Rwanda before the election Illegal migration and the little boats arriving with migrants from France obseize the Tory party and its electorate. and its electorate. His pledge is to curb them. Sunak has argued that his legislation is the "only way" to get flights before the next election. A Downing Street source said: "It's time to deliver. The overwhelming weight of legal opinion is that this bill works and will be an effective deterrent to stop the ships. Let's get on with it and take the fight to Labour." As with Brexit The battle is like the one Prime Minister Theresa May endured during Brexit. Hardline Conservative MPs made it clear they were unwilling to back the government. The European Research Group's "star chamber" group of lawyers concluded that the Rwanda security bill provided only a "partial or incomplete solution" Mark Francois, chairman of the group, said the legislation had "so many holes" that the consensus in his wing of the party was that the government should "withdraw the bill" and submit a revised version. "To completely block any court challenge would be a breach of international law and alien to the UK's constitutional tradition of liberty and justice, where even in times of war the UK has maintained access to the courts so that individuals can defend their rights and freedoms," the government said. Sunak in serious trouble Whatever happens today in the vote on the emergency legislation, Rishi Sunak is in serious trouble. British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak. Photo: EFE By making flights to Rwanda this "totem" policy of his premiership, he has stoked a civil war in this party that threatens to blow up its benches and its leadership, just as Brexit did with Theresa May. Because, as with Brexit, the left and right of the party are divided, unable to find common ground. The moderates are very clear that Sunak should not do anything that undermines the rule of law. The right wing of the party wants the prime minister to toughen the bill. Some even believe the government should withdraw from international obligations, such as the European Convention on Human Rights. Moderate Tories "strongly urge the government to stand firm against any attempt to amend the bill in a way that would make it unacceptable to those who believe that support for the rule of law is a core Conservative principle." While Sunak says he will listen to concerns, his allies have made it clear that he will not support a significant rewrite of the legislation. He is a prime minister who wants to stay within the bounds of international law. Over the next 24 hours, he will urge right-wing rebels to support him. But what is clear is that winning the vote this Tuesday is only the beginning, not the end of the war. For now, Sunak is doing everything he can to win the vote. His argument will be that this emergency legislation is about the fundamental principle of addressing illegal immigration and that the party must be seen to approve it. But he also knows that his is a delayed, unresolved confrontation. A party at civil war and a prime minister unable to stop it. Load-Date: December 13, 2023  End of Document
