   Road to independence is even harder today; The SNP's latest paper on secession is an exercise in cakeism and fantasy of which Boris Johnson would be proud The Times (London) November 20, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 21 Length: 1052 words Byline: Iain Macwhirter Body   Counterfactuals are all the rage in podcasts and book publishing. So let's consider the most interesting political counterfactual of recent UK history: what would have happened had Scotland voted "yes" in 2014? Well, in the first instance, not very much. There would have been no border posts or regulatory checks at Carlisle since both Scotland and England would've remained in the European single market. Scotland would also have retained the pound, as per the 2013 independence white paper. We would not have had to set up a central bank and an independent currency, still less adopt the much-maligned euro, from which the UK has a cast-iron opt out. By far the biggest impact of a "yes" vote, continuing with our thought experiment, would have been to stop Brexit. The UK prime minister, David Cameron, would have resigned on September 18 in disgrace having wrecked a 300-year oldunion. His successor, probably the UK justice secretary Kenneth Clarke as caretaker, would have been too busy sorting issues such as the Barnett formula and Trident to think of staging a referendum on the www.EU.No one would be daft enough even to suggest it. But of course in the real world Scotland voted "no" to independence and the UK voted "yes" to Brexit in 2016. As a result, the independencelite prospectus of 2014 is obsolete. The Yes campaign was premised on Scotland and England remaining in the EU single market. Scottish independence today means erecting precisely the customs and regulatory border the SNP has condemned for destabilising the peace of Northern Ireland. And unlike in 2014, Scotland would have to create a new Scottish currency from scratch in order to rejoin the EU. This would probably mean spending restraint - cuts to you or me - and/or swingeing tax increases, as set out in the SNP's Sustainable Growth Commission report of 2018. If the Scottish government tried to retain the pound willy nilly there would be a rush to the exit by every bank and business capable of relocating to England. Yet, until recently, the SNP pretended that none of this would happen. With wilful deception, deployed in successive elections, Nicola Sturgeon insisted that "there would be no need for a border because it would be in no one's interest to have one". But while Scotland might not want a border, the European Union most certainly would. Scotland could not fulfil the "acquis", the rules of the European Union, without a watertight regulatory and customs border, policed by the European Court of Justice, and backed by its own currency. Last week the SNP finally admitted most of this in their latest position paper, An Independent Scotland in the EU. But it is a measure of the state of the independence debate in Scotland, a decade on, that few bothered to read it and even fewer took it seriously. Even the constitution minister, Angus Robertson, seemed to be phoning it www.in.No wonder: the document is an exercise in cakeism of which Boris Johnson would be proud. We'll set up the new pound, it says, and in a couple of years we'll be safely tucked away in the EU, laughing at miserable Brexit Britain. This is fantasy. Even Alex Salmond has admitted that rejoining the EU could take five to ten years. Many in the SNP share the former first minister's belief that an independent Scotland should instead join the European Free Trade Area, EFTA, and give the Brussels bureaucracy a wide berth. Don't worry about borders, says Robertson, everyone has them and they can be a good thing since ours would allow access to the biggest single market on the planet: the EU. However, Scotland's biggest trading partner is actually the UK, which takes two thirds of Scottish exports. We've seen how UK trade and growth has been damaged by Brexit. Yet Robertson insists, as Boris Johnson did in 2020, that technology and goodwill can prevent any "friction" - those pesky SPS checks and whatever that led to lorry parks at Dover and reams of paperwork for firms exporting to Northern Ireland. The techno fix that was supposed to prevent friction between Northern Ireland and the Republic in 2018 proved as elusive as nuclear fusion. We haven't heard much about the province recently because of much more serious border conflicts in Ukraine and Israel/Gaza, but that doesn't mean the clash over the Northern Ireland protocol is resolved. There is still no government in Stormont to resolve it and trade with the North has collapsed. Boris Johnson's bullish promise to Unionists of "no checks GB to NI" proved as reliable as his statements on No 10 parties. The SNP has made the case against "Scexit" by its very opposition to Brexit. Secession is no fun. Currencies are a nightmare. Leaving established unions creates all manner of regulatory and trade problems. Nations and regions generally avoid breaking from established economic and currency unions if they can possibly avoid it. That is why Greece remained in the EU even as the European Central Bank crucified its economy. Independence movements are motivated, not by marginal economic advantage, but by the thirst for freedom. Those countries that the SNP cites as having won independence in the last 80 years have invariably done so because they were oppressed by colonial powers or Stalinist overlords. The Baltic states accepted a bit of economic destabilisation because they wanted to throw off the yoke of communism. African states saw disruption of trade as a price worth paying to throw off the yoke of colonialism. Scotland is not oppressed by England, nor is it a colony except in the minds of ultra-nationalists on Twitter. Scots have full economic and civil rights and their own cherished culture. Scotland is not exploited by colonial capitalists - quite the reverse. The Barnett formula transfers billions annually to underwrite Scottish public spending. We even have our own parliament. Scotland could of course in time become a viable independent country in Europe, just like Slovakia or Denmark. That isn't at issue. But there is no hiding the hard road that would be involved in getting from here to there. Scots love their nation but are much too sensible and sceptical to accept a tendentious prospectus that amounts to Brexit on stilts. There is no hiding the hard road that would be involved Scotland might not want a border but the EU certainly would Graphic    The SNP has made the case against "Scexit" with its opposition to BrexitPETER SUMMERS Load-Date: November 20, 2023  End of Document
