   Some tests are more important to the Government than the DUP's seven; With Windsor Framework set in stone, navigating NI's post-Brexit governance requires pragmatism and clarity. By Andrew McCormick Belfast Telegraph August 30, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 19 Length: 1298 words Byline: Andrew McCormick Body   THE DUP insists that the way forward on the governance of Northern Ireland has to take account of its seven tests on the acceptability (or otherwise) of the post-Brexit settlement. However, it is very clear from the actions, and even occasionally the words, of the UK Government over the last seven years that for them there are other tests that take precedence over the DUP's. Minister Steve Baker's interview last week, and in particular his reference to "the impossible" is a rare but very clear example of candid acknowledgement of the factual realities that apply. The post-Brexit context is that the UK Government is seeking new ways of building trade relationships with global partners (including the EU), and this limits the scope to give priority to the issues affecting Northern Ireland. The important question really is: does the DUP accept the tests that matter most to the UK Government and indeed to the EU and to businesses? If not, it is very hard to see how devolved government can be restored. The higher tests set out here with reference to the Windsor Framework have been applied to the strategic decisions that successive UK governments have taken, and the commitments they have made in international agreements (in the Joint Report of December 2017; the Withdrawal Agreement of 2019; the Joint Committee decisions of December 2020 agreed with the EU regarding the implementation of the Protocol; and the Windsor Framework of February 2023). Test one: Does the Windsor Framework take reasonable account of the fundamental Brexit trilemma? The "trilemma" is that it is only possible to choose two of the following - and impossible to have all three: no hard land border on the island of Ireland; no checks and controls on goods entering Northern Ireland from Great Britain; and a Brexit based on leaving the EU single market and customs union. Theresa May's administration was extremely reluctant to accept this fundamental logic, i.e. that their proposals would necessitate checks and controls somewhere, unless the whole of the UK remained aligned to EU regulations. To this day, some hanker after "alternative arrangements" or other unicorns that avoid the fundamental reality that when there is a border, as a dividing line between markets, it is necessary to know what goods are crossing it, whether or not that movement complies with the different (and potentially diverging) regulatory regimes, and that it is possible (with reasonable and proportionate regard for risk) to prevent non-compliant movement of goods. This was very clearly recognised in the UK's proposed approach to the Northern Ireland issues in October 2019, when, to resolve the trilemma, the Johnson Government made a decisive judgment to propose checks and controls at the Northern Ireland ports, and confirmed the commitment against a land border. Test two: Is the Windsor Framework consistent with the Belfast/Good Friday Agreement? Much of the discussion around the issue of controls at the land border in Ireland has focused on the risks to the Belfast/Good Friday Agreement, though in fact the absence of border controls had no direct connection with the 1998 Agreement. Checks and controls between Great Britain and Northern Ireland are equally (arguably more) in tension with the terms of the 1998 Agreement as a hard land border. Brexit was not in contemplation in the negotiations in 1998, and the reality is that there is no post-Brexit solution that does not disturb the balance of the Agreement in one way or another. Hence this test does not help in the quest for an agreed solution, as any scenario with the UK outside the EU single market and customs union fails this test. Test three: Is the Windsor Framework as good as, or better, in practical terms than any known alternative? A reasonable and dispassionate comparison of the effects of on the one hand a hard land border and on the other checks and controls at the Northern Ireland ports could only demonstrate that the former would be both more disruptive and less effective. Indeed, as far back as August 2016, the then First Minister and Deputy First Ministers (Arlene Foster and Martin McGuinness) implicitly recognised the impossibility of managing a border on the island of Ireland in the letter they sent to Prime Minister May. It is not possible to prevent animal or plant diseases from crossing a land border characterised by multiple crossing points, farms and fields that straddle it, and many integrated supply chains. The evidence that the Windsor Framework does not resolve all the problems arising from the Withdrawal Agreement is very clear. But the real test is whether there is a better alternative. Seven years of intense debate and analysis has not produced one. "Mutual Enforcement" has been rejected because it does not robustly meet the minimum requirements for controls and market management that are required under Test one. Test four: Is the Windsor Framework acceptable to both the UK Parliament and to the European Council, parliament and commission? Neither the backstop, nor the resolution of the trilemma by the UK remaining in dynamic alignment with the relevant EU regulations, were acceptable to theUK Parliament. Mutual enforcement is not acceptable to the EU even if the UK could accept it (there is a clue in the word "mutual": it means both sides have to agree to do something). The Windsor Framework has been decisively supported by the UK and the EU. This matters because the UK Government has made a clear and decisive judgment to change from a confrontational approach (as in the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill) to an agreed approach. This shows that avoiding a trade war, and attritional legal battles with the EU, is more important from the UK's point of view, even than the restoration of devolved government in Northern Ireland. As Article 50 has expired, any new radical proposal could mean a new treaty that would require ratification by the 27 member states, and in any case, there is absolutely no appetite in the EU or the member states for yet another negotiation. Test five: Does the Windsor Framework have the consent of the majority of the people of Northern Ireland? The protocol and the Windsor Framework have had the support of a clear majority of the representatives of Northern Ireland at all three elections since October 2019, and all the available evidence suggests that is a fair reflection of public opinion. It was made clear in Article 18 of the Northern Ireland Protocol that cross-community support would be highly desirable, but there is no precedent for that to be required in relation to an issue of international relations, which by definition, requires an international agreement - this is an excepted matter in the 1998 settlement. Conclusion The tests above have been implicit in the long journey from the vote in June 2016 to the present day. If, but only if, more than one available option passed these five tests, it might be possible for the further tests highlighted by the DUP to be considered. Eventually, it should be clear that the Windsor Framework is the imperfect final outcome of a very difficult process. Its flaws are material, but the UK Government has clearly judged that these are not as damaging as any known alternative. Implementation will be difficult, because the way ahead is inherently complex, so it is vital that both the UK and the EU do all that is possible to provide clarity and pragmatism in the period ahead. It is necessary to seek to manage the complexity that we now face, rather than to tilt at windmills. Andrew McCormick is a former permanent secretary and from 2018 director general of international relations in the Executive Office. In that role he was the lead official in the NI Civil Service on Brexit until his retirement in 2021 Graphic    Agreement: Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and European Commission chief Ursula von der Leyen shake hands after agreeing on the Windsor Framework in February Load-Date: August 30, 2023  End of Document
