   Sotheby's blames Brexit red tape for decline in UK art market sales The Sunday Telegraph (London) August 6, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 21 Length: 344 words Byline: James Warrington Body   SOTHEBY's has blamed Brexit red tape for a decline in the UK art market as its profits tumbled by almost 75pc. The historic auction house, owned by French billionaire Patrick Drahi, posted a fall in profits to $88m (£69m) in 2022, down from $318m the previous year. Total income generated from sales slumped to $127m from $360m, according to the latest accounts for parent company BidFair. Bosses blamed the impact of Brexit for the downturn, with imports of arts and antiques down 18pc in 2021 and a further 16pc last year. They warned the slump "may worsen over time". Sotheby's said: "The increased red tape resulting from Brexit is adversely affecting our ability to move property between the UK and the European Union and the retention and travel of our employees, further contributing to the UK ad market's decline." It said additional import and export taxes and duties had a negative impact on the appeal of selling property in the UK compared to other locations.The company added that the quantity and quality of property listed for sale in London and future demand for art in its London salesroom had also taken a hit. The figures highlight the ongoing impact of Britain's decision to leave the EU on the 279-year-old auction house. Sotheby's was taken private in a $3.7bn takeover deal by Mr Drahi through his holding company BidFair in 2019. The deal was seen as a high water mark in the art market, which rebounded strongly from the global financial crisis. Sotheby's has overseen a number of high-profile sales in recent years, including work by Andy Warhol, David Hockney and Mark Rothko. Last year it closed the sale of the Macklowe Collection for $922m - the most valuable art collection ever sold at auction. But beyond the blockbuster deals, Sotheby's, which has 80 locations around the world, has been hit by uncertainty and market volatility in the wake of Brexit. The company said the invasion in Ukraine had little impact on its business, as it does not conduct sales in Russia and Russian clients made up less than 1pc of its activity in 2021 and 2022. Graphic    Oliver Barker, the chairman of Sotheby's Europe, leads the sale of the Macklowe Collection, above. The auction house posted a fall in profits to $88m in 2022 Load-Date: October 27, 2023  End of Document
