   Starmer promises to seek closer trading ties with EU The Daily Telegraph (London) September 19, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 306 words Byline: Genevieve Holl-Allen ; Jack Maidment Body   SIR KEIR STARMER has pledged to pursue a "closer trading relationship" with the European Union if Labour win power at the next general election. The Labour leader said he would seek to rewrite the existing Brexit deal when it is up for review in 2025. He told the Financial Times at a conference of centre-Left political leaders in Montreal: "Almost everyone recognises the deal [Boris] Johnson struck is not a good deal - it's far too thin. As we go into 2025 we will attempt to get a much better deal for the UK." He added: "I do think we can have a closer trading relationship as well. That's subject to further discussion." Sir Keir insisted he had an "utter determination" to make Brexit work and again stated that Labour would not seek to take the UK back into the EU. The Conservative Party has seized on the Labour leader's comments, accusing him of wanting to take Britain "back to square one on Brexit". Among his motivations for rewriting the Brexit deal, he told the Financial Times, were his two children. "I've got a 15-year-old boy and a 12-year-old girl. I'm not going to let them grow up in a world where all I've got to say to them about their future is, it's going to be worse than it might otherwise have been." Sir Keir said he saw the 2025 review of Brexit as an "important" moment to reset UK-EU relations, as he continues his overseas tour. He will travel to Paris today to meet President Emmanuel Macron, where they are expected to discuss post-Brexit relations and a possible migrant returns deal with Europe. The indication that a Labour government could do a deal where the UK takes a quota of asylum seekers in exchange for the ability to return migrants who illegally cross the Channel drew criticism from the Tories. 'Almost everyone recognises the deal Boris Johnson struck is not a good deal - it's far too thin' Load-Date: September 19, 2023  End of Document
