   Starmer 'to push for closer EU links' The Times (London) September 22, 2023 Friday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 562 words Byline: Oliver Wright Body   A future Labour government would not diverge from EU laws or do "different things", Sir Keir Starmer said at a conference of centre-left leaders in Canada. In unguarded remarks that have been seized on by the Tories, Starmer went further than Labour's official position on the kind of post-Brexit relationship the party will seek with Brussels. He suggested that Labour wanted to foster close ties with the bloc, arguing that "there's a lot more common ground than you might think". At an event on Saturday with Jonas Gahr Store, the Norwegian prime minister, Starmer said: "Most of the conflict with the UK being outside of the UK [sic] arises insofar as the UK wants to diverge and do different things to the rest of our EU partners. Obviously, the more we share values, the more we share a future together, the less the conflict. And actually different ways of solving problems become available." He added: "We don't want to diverge, we don't want to lower standards, we don't want to rip up environmental standards, standards for people that work, food standards and all the rest of it. So suddenly, you're in a space where, notwithstanding the obvious fact that we're outside the EU and not in the [European Economic Area], there's a lot more common ground than you might think." Starmer's remarks, first reported by Sky News, are in contrast to Labour's position on Brexit which he laid out in a speech last year. He said then that Labour's plan was to "make Brexit work" and pledged to "use our flexibility outside of the EU to ensure British regulation is adapted to suit British needs". The latest remarks will lead to speculation that Starmer would like to move Britain into a position where a future Labour government could take the country back into the EU's single market even though this has been denied. A Labour Party spokesman said: "We've left the European Union and we're not going back in any form. We don't support dynamic alignment. We're not joining the single market or the customs union. We will not be in a situation where we are a rule taker. Any decisions on what standards we follow will be made in the UK parliament. "The Tories have not used Brexit to diverge on food, environmental or labour standards and if they have a plan to do so they should come clean with people." Anand Menon, director of the think tank UK in a Changing Europe, said the most interesting thing about Starmer's remarks was the self-confidence it showed in being prepared to "pick a fight" with the government over Brexit. "They know the government has shot its own reputation and even Leave voters are unlikely to respond to any appeal to defend 'the real Brexit'," he said. "The polling shows that voters don't think Brexit is working and for that they blame the government." Charles Grant, director of the Centre for European Reform, told Sky News the comments went further than what Starmer had said previously, and that Brexiteers might question the point of leaving the EU if the UK does not significantly deregulate. "He's trying to soften up the other world leaders so they know what to expect when he becomes prime minister, if he does," he said. Michael Gove, the levelling-up secretary, said the comments reflected "the real Keir Starmer", adding: "I'm afraid that Keir Starmer has shown that he wants us to go back into the EU and back to the Brexit agonies of the past." Load-Date: September 22, 2023  End of Document
