   STURGEON FINALLY KNOCKED OFF HER SOAPBOX!; Covid lawyer's withering putdown as ex First Minister blames Brexit for pandemic failures A WITNESS BOX, NOT A SOAPBOX Sturgeon slapped down over rant at inquiry Scottish Daily Mail June 30, 2023 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 1,6 Length: 1004 words Byline: Michael Blackley Body   NICOLA Sturgeon was yesterday warned she was speaking from a 'witness box, not a soapbox' at the Covid-19 inquiry. It came after the former First Minister blamed the failure to adequately prepare for a pandemic on the Scottish Government having to focus on arrangements for a no-deal Brexit. She then launched into a rant about the impact of exiting the EU, Turn to Page 6 Continued from Page One saying it had been a 'false economy', only to be reprimanded by Hugo Keith, KC, the inquiry's chief lawyer, who told her: 'That is a witness box, not a soapbox.' Ms Sturgeon had claimed that the Scottish Government 'had no choice' over pausing work on preparing for a pandemic in the run-up to Covid in order to focus on preparations for a no-deal Brexit. In her first appearance at the inquiry in London, she also admitted that her government 'did not get everything right' and had no plan for a non-flu pandemic ahead of the arrival of the virus in 2020. Scottish Tory health spokesman Dr Sandesh Gulhane said: 'True to form, Nicola Sturgeon tried to blame something or someone else for Scotland's lack of preparedness for the pandemic - her default response to any criticism. 'So it was encouraging to see the inquiry KC stop the former First Minister in her tracks by swiping away her soapbox. 'Covid posed an unprecedented challenge for governments around the world and all will have lessons to learn from it. In the SNP's case, one of the questions they must answer is over the release of Covid-positive patients into care homes. 'On such a serious subject, Nicola Sturgeon should stick to defending her government's actions rather than political point-scoring.' Asked about a disclosure by Scottish Government officials the previous day that resources were diverted away from pandemic planning towards 'Operation Yellowhammer' no-deal Brexit planning, Ms Sturgeon said she was 'very aware of the necessity to divert resources from other priorities to plan for and look at the potential for a no-deal Brexit'. She said: 'Brexit obviously was something that was happening completely against the will of the Scottish Government, so we were not at all happy about what we were having to do. 'But to put it bluntly, we had no choice because had a no-deal Brexit happened - and there were periods over 2019 where that was a distinct possibility - the consequences of that would have been very, very severe. 'The planning assumptions in Yellowhammer were grim and extremely worrying, so we had no alternative to do that work to the best of our ability and we have limited resources. It stands to reason that with so much effort on that there was going to be less resource available for other aspects of emergency planning.' Mr Keith told her that an influenza pandemic was a 'tier one risk' in the UK Government's risk register, and said it was no less a risk in Scotland. He added: 'It was identified as the greatest risk facing a nation in the plethora of risks which any nation faces. 'So would you agree that the diversion of resource and money and time from that issue, that area of planning for the greatest risk which the country faced, was ultimately a false economy?' Ms Sturgeon replied: 'I think every aspect of Brexit has been false economy, if I can put it mildly, but that's another issue altogether.' Mr Keith interrupted her, saying: 'Ms Sturgeon, I'm so sorry: that is a witness box, not a soapbox. We cannot allow the political debate of Brexit to be ventilated here.' Ms Sturgeon said the questions were 'very germane' to the whole issue, and added: 'Yes I think it was deeply regrettable that resources had to be diverted from any other area of work, and in particular pandemic preparedness.' The former First Minister, who had to swear to tell 'the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth', opened her appearance at the inquiry by reading out a statement offering her condolences to everyone who suffered as a result of Covid-19. Ms Sturgeon said: 'The pandemic may be over but for very many people that suffering continues to this day and there is not a day that passes that I don't think about that.' She is due to make a second appearance in a session about decision-making and political governance, where she will face questions about issues such as the decision to transfer hospital patients to care homes without testing them first. During questioning, Ms Sturgeon conceded that a commitment by her government to review the UK's sole strategy for an influenza pandemic written in 2011 never happened, but insisted that even if the document had been updated she did not believe it would have radically changed. Asked if she agreed with other inquiry participants that the plan was 'wholly inadequate', Ms Sturgeon replied: 'In summary, yes. 'The plan was for a different type of pandemic than the one we unfortunately were confronted with. What there wasn't, and I think this is the significant gap, is there was no set plan into how we dealt with a pandemic that had the features and characteristics of flu in terms of transmissi- bility, but also the severity and what we came to understand in terms of asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19. 'The questions in my mind, every day, are not so much did we lack a plan but did we lack capabilities for dealing with a pandemic of the nature of Covid-19. And obviously I'm talking there about contact tracing, testing, infrastructure in particular.' Scottish Liberal Democrat leader Alex Cole-Hamilton said: 'Not long after Nicola Sturgeon took over as First Minister, health bosses took part in the Silver Swan pandemic planning exercise. 'That exercise was a complete shambles which claimed there was sufficient PPE stockpiled for even the worst-case scenario, didn't mention testing and missed out care homes. 'Given these failings, I'm sure many of those families who lost loved ones would have welcomed an apology from Nicola Sturgeon for the inadequacies of her government's planning.' Comment - Page 20 'True to form, she tried to blame someone else' 'A complete shambles' Graphic    Questions: Hugo Keith, KC Load-Date: June 30, 2023  End of Document
