   Sunak keeps his controversial immigration plan alive, but not his principles: is anything goes to govern? CE Noticias Financieras English December 12, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1040 words Body    Just as happened with David Cameron and Theresa May, the current tenant of Downing Street, Rishi Sunak, could become yet another victim of his own party. Desperate to find a measure that will unite the various 'Tory' tribes that have only Brexit in common, he has now clung to a controversial policy that he cannot implement and that has tarnished the one thing he had going for him: the promise that he was better, more constitutionally correct and less reckless than the two prime ministers who preceded him (the chaotic Boris Johnson and the fleeting Liz Truss).  The 'Tory' leader has survived the most important vote of his term in office on Tuesday night with his controversial plan to send asylum seekers arriving by irregular routes to Rwanda. But oxygen is not guaranteed for long. By early next year, the air pump could either recharge or empty completely, ending his political career when he has been in Number 10 for just over a year.  After days of maximum tension and serious threats of rebellion, Sunak has managed to keep his controversial immigration bill alive for the time being, despite the abstention of the hard core of the formation. The House of Commons approved by 313 votes in favor against 269 against the second phase of the bill. A difference of just 44 votes for a vote that had become, in practice, a motion of confidence on his management of one of the issues that most concerns the electorate and on which Sunak, according to the polls, has lost control and his principles. The suicide on Tuesday of one of the asylum seekers housed on the 'Bibby Stockholm' has increased the controversy surrounding the 'prison ship' docked in Dorset.  Today, Sunak remains the 'tory' leader. However, there is still a long way to go in Westminster to pass the Rwanda plan bill and the hard core is threatening action if amendments are not included to tighten up what is one of the most controversial measures of the post Brexit era .  After the High Court deemed "illegal" the plan to send illegal immigrants to the African country - the centerpiece of the current legislature - Sunak has struck a new pact with Kigali with amendments to ensure that "persons displaced to Rwanda will not be at risk of being returned to a country where their life or freedom would be threatened."  The bill has been drafted explicitly to contradict the Supreme Court's November 15 ruling that Rwanda is not a safe country. In order to please the moderate wing of its ranks, it leaves open the opportunity for immigrants to file legal challenges against their deportation based on individual circumstances .  But, in order to please the hard wing, the government is confident that it will be able to prevent domestic courts from taking injunctions that would ruin the flights, as a very high bar is set for a successful claim. The Home Office believes that 99.5 percent of the challenges will not go ahead.  Yet the threat of injunctions from Strasbourg has prompted the government's own legal advisory team to warn that there is only a"50 percent chance at best" of allowing the flights to go ahead. The new bill would give ministers power to ignore an interim injunction from the European Court of Human Rights - which has already blocked the first planned flight in summer 2022 - and there are serious doubts about whether this would breach the UK's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.  Sunak has insisted he will comply with international obligations, but is also confident that ignoring Strasbourg's interim orders would not constitute a breach. "I will not allow a foreign court to block these flights," he said in an attempt to appease hard-wing rebels who are ultimately calling for pulling the U.K. out of the landmark 1950 convention.  The prime minister wants the first plane to leave for Rwanda in April, before the general election. It would be a symbol of having "regained control" of the borders, the great promise of Brexit, but nothing is guaranteed. His political survival depends on finding the difficult balance to please all the tribes of his party. For the moment, the Rwanda plan, rather than transferring people, is transferring only money. Payments to the African country already exceed 290 million pounds.  In short, immigration - or rather his inability to manage it - has become a major Achilles heel for a prime minister who took office on the promise of restoring the government's procedural decorum, but is now prepared to ignore the interim injunctions of the European Court of Human Rights. Is it possible that the formation is considering changing its leader again? This is something that analysts are beginning to comment on with increasing frequency. A priori, it might seem far-fetched considering that there is only one year left for the general elections, or even less, because they could be brought forward to May 2024. However, taking into account the modus operandi of the Conservatives, no scenario can be ruled out.  Since 2010, when they came to the Government, they have already passed through the mythical black door of Number 10. The Conservative ranks had no qualms even to force the departure of Boris Johnson, the same who won them an overwhelming majority in the last elections and executed the Brexit. So their pulse will not tremble now with Sunak, who has not even passed the ballot box test, since he became Prime Minister through a primary process in which the affiliates had neither voice nor vote.  With a lead of more than twenty points for the Labor opposition, spirits among the Conservatives are at rock bottom. They are willing to do anything to turn the polls around. But everything points to the end of an era.  As with David Cameron and Theresa May, the current tenant of Downing Street, Rishi Sunak, could become yet another victim of his own party. Desperate to find a measure that will unite the various 'Tory' tribes that have only Brexit in common, he has now clung to a controversial policy that he cannot implement and that has tarnished the only thing he had going for him: the promise that he was better, more constitutionally correct and less reckless than the two prime ministers who preceded him (the chaotic Boris Johnson and the fleeting Liz Truss).  Load-Date: December 13, 2023  End of Document
