   Surprise! Top mandarin admits he voted Remain; Outcry as ex-Foreign Office chief is accused of breaching rules Mail on Sunday (London) September 12, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 588 words Byline: Jason Groves Body   A FORMER Whitehall mandarin sparked calls for the reform of the Civil Service yesterday after he appeared to admit breaking impartiality rules over Brexit. In an extraordinary revelation, former Foreign Office chief Simon McDonald said he had told staff he voted Remain in the wake of the 2016 referendum to show solidarity with his shell-shocked officials. Lord McDonald said the move was necessary to 'maintain credibility' in a department which was left 'in mourning' after Britain voted to leave the EU. But his decision appeared to be in breach of the Civil Service code and fuelled concerns that senior officials tried to frustrate Brexit. Former Cabinet minister Liam Fox described Sir Simon's comments as 'completely inappropriate'. Dr Fox, who served as international trade secretary during the Brexit negotiations, said: 'It is yet another example of the loss of the Civil Service impartiality we have a right to expect. 'This sort of attitude was a big issue during the negotiations. We had politicians trying to thwart Brexit in Parliament, including the Speaker John Bercow. And we clearly had a nod and a wink to the Civil Service from senior figures like Lord McDonald that it was fine to put the brakes on. 'It just reinforces the need for Civil Service reform. We need to move to a system where the secretary of state can sack the permanent secretary because we need to know that the top of the civil service is committed to implementing what the public have voted for.' Fellow Tory Peter Bone said: 'These comments show there was a fundamental problem with people at the heart of government refusing to accept the verdict of the British people. 'You could see the results at the time - it explains why we had these farcical delays and obstacles to leaving the EU.' Lord McDonald admitted that the Foreign Office's board was 'not entirely comfortable' with his decision to reveal to staff and ministers how he had voted. Told about his comments, former deputy cabinet secretary Helen MacNamara told the BBC: 'Wow, that is genuinely surprising... I don't know why that would be a good or helpful thing.' A fellow mandarin described Sir Simon as a 'pompous a**e'. Lord McDonald's comments are made in a documentary by the BBC's Laura Kuenssberg on the chaos that engulfed Westminster following the Brexit vote. He said the Foreign Office was 'in mourning' after the Brexit vote. 'People were in tears. People were in shock,' he said. 'On this occasion, this solitary occasion, I decided to tell my colleagues and therefore let ministers know that I voted to remain in the EU.' He added: 'I was trying to maintain credibility and trying to convey a message to a group of people, most of whom I felt had voted to remain in the EU, that their personal feelings were beside the professional point.' The code for civil servants requires that they act with impartiality by never allowing 'personal political views to determine any advice you give or your actions'. They are barred from expressing personal views 'on matters of national political controversy'. But Tory MP Alicia Kearns, who previously served as an official at the Foreign Office, said anti-Brexit views were common in the department at the time. Ms Kearns said one senior civil servant told a meeting of officials: 'We know the British public got it wrong.' One former Foreign Office official also claimed that Lord McDonald had been 'deliberately obstructive' when ministers were trying to negotiate Britain's departure from the EU. Comment - Page 14 'Loss of impartiality' Load-Date: September 12, 2023  End of Document
