   The last days of Westminster CE Noticias Financieras English November 15, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 916 words Body   It is, at the level of British politics, as if Vesuvius were in the county of Kent and every day that passes it spews smoke and ashes with greater fury from its mouth. Only in this case the volcano is the general election due in about a year's time (January 2024 at the latest), Pompeii is Westminster, and its frightened inhabitants are the members of the Conservative Party. Strange things happen as the end approaches ("we die with those who die," wrote the poet T.S. Elliot), and there are a few of them happening on the British right. Yesterday, Suella Braverman, the recently dismissed Home Secretary, published on X (formerly Twitter) an inflammatory farewell letter in which she accuses Premier Rishi Sunak not only of weakness and ineptitude, but also of betrayal, and a few hours earlier David Cameron -now Lord Cameron- sat in the Cabinet meeting as the new head of the Foreign Office together with several of his former ministers and subordinates (Jeremy Hunt, Michael Gove, Oliver Dowden, Grant Shapps ...) when he was the tenant of Downing Steet, and now they are his peers. Surreal, Everyone is wondering why, and the answer lies in Sunak's acceptance that, barring a miracle, Vesuvius is going to carry Pompeii away (the latest poll points to a Labour majority of over two hundred seats and the annihilation of the Tories), and in the latest seismic movement within the Conservative Party, unaccustomed to losing, which has been in power for 13 years and sees it slipping away. With the arrival of Cameron and the purge of the extreme right, Sunak wants to avoid an electoral debacle. Predicting a historic defeat. "Throwing passengers overboard does not seem the best tactic when the ship is heading for the rocks; better to move the rudder and change direction," a Tory MP commented yesterday. But Rishi Sunak has already altered course a few times, and in the end there are always the same cliffs, summed up in exhaustion after five prime ministers in the last seven years (Cameron, May, Johnson, Truss and the current one), cost of living crises, immigration, deteriorating public services, and Brexit. Sunak and those advising him are like those soccer coaches who do not write off the league despite being twenty points behind (Labour's lead in the polls), but have decided to salvage what furniture they can. They assume that the coalition Boris Johnson forged in 2019, with the promise of Brexit, is unrepeatable, and that he is going to lose the vast majority of seats in the north and center of England that he snatched from Labour (depressed post-industrial regions with socially conservative and Eurosceptic voters). By getting rid of Braverman and getting Cameron back, the Prime Minister appeals to traditional Tories in the south of the country, more affluent and more highly educated; fiscally conservative and eager for a tax cut, but only if finances allow it; reluctant to immigration, but without hostile and inflammatory language; not necessarily Europeanist, but not addicted to English nationalism either. The Conservative Party faces two enemies in the elections, Labour in the so-called red wall (those seats in the north of England), and the Liberal Democrats in the prosperous countryside counties surrounding London (the blue wall). The former are more numerous, but their defense is much more difficult, so he has opted to entrench himself in the latter. There Cameron appears as the voice of reason and common sense lost since Brexit (history is often kinder to former leaders than many deserve), even though he was the godfather of austerity and asked the British the baleful question of whether or not they wanted to remain in the EU. But you don't have to see much to be king in the land of the blind, and compared to the May-Johnson-Truss trio that came after.... Realignment. Sunak has gambled on moving closer to the center to avoid a debacle, recognizing (without saying it) that most Britons regret Brexit and repositioning himself (first he presented himself as a technocrat, then as an anti-establishment rebel, now as a moderate). In reality, the Tories have been mutating and searching for their identity since they dumped Margaret Thatcher, and - despite winning several elections - have not found a philosophy to replace Thatcherism and live in a state of permanent civil war. Within them there are more tribes than in Afghanistan, and Sunak's is the last attempt to keep at bay an advance of the Eurosceptic and xenophobic extreme right of the party that began with the rebellion to the Maastricht treaty in Major's time, pressured Cameron until he called the referendum, prevented the soft Brexit sought by Theresa May, surrendered to Johnson and gave the leadership to the hallucinogenic libertarian Truss. Who now takes inspiration from Trump, keeps proclaiming the "benefits" of not being in the EU and demands to leave the European Convention on Human Rights if today the Supreme Court does not approve the deportation of asylum seekers to Rwanda. Cameron, socially liberal, brings talent to a Cabinet in which there is no surplus, and Sunak is going to delegate all foreign policy to him in order to concentrate on domestic policy. But he also comes with his baggage (such as business with China). What he would like is to rewrite his legacy. "We die with those who die, they depart and with them we go; they return and bring us with them" (T.S. Elliot). The Conservatives are not resigned to die, and Cameron has accepted the offer to return. Load-Date: November 16, 2023  End of Document
