   The big question Is the UK better off since Brexit?; Yes Lord Frost, former minister and Brexit negotiator Only one statistic No Emily Fry, an economist at The Resolution Foundation, a think tank The Times (London) July 8, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 56 Length: 581 words Body   Only one statistic matters for our living standards and that is economic growth. That statistic tells us that we are not poorer for leaving the EU. Since we left the EU economic zone at the end of 2020 Britain's economy has grown faster than that of France, Germany, Italy and Spain*.UK productivity in the private sector is well above pre-pandemic levels and is growing in line with the, admittedly slow, norms seen after the banking crash. Only in the public sector is it weak, but that's poor management, not Brexit. Nor, despite what you hear, is trade falling. Figures are hugely distorted by the pandemic and big changes in energy flows and prices because of the Ukraine war. Critics of Brexit brandish one statistic after another, desperate to prove it is failing. Many of these are predictions not facts. Don't listen to them. Remainers said the economy would crash if we voted to leave. It did not. The International Monetary Fund and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) said that Britain would be in recession this year. We are not. They said Germany would grow. It is in recession, as is the whole eurozone. And finally - though it is rarely mentioned nowadays - we no longer have to send vast sums to the EU budget. In 2019 we paid just under £10 billion. The EU budget is now nearly twice as big, so we could by now have been paying about £20 billion. Of course, just doing as well as the EU is not good enough. We should do better. All of Europe has a growth problem. None of us can be happy with that, it's easier for us to grow when Europe does too. But outside the EU, we have the tools to deal with our problems and get on a different path. *GDP percentage change for 2021 and 2022 according to OECD figures Brexit has left us less open to buy and sell goods and services. In early 2023, total trade as a share of GDP had fallen by 7.8 per cent since Q4 2018, by far the worst in the G7, where trade openness was down just 0.5 per cent on average, according to OECD data. In particular our high-value manufacturers are struggling as they are more reliant on EU supply chains that are becoming more cumbersome and expensive for British firms. The car industry shows the problems facing manufacturers, as firms decide where to make electric vehicles. Car producers need a large market - more than half the cars made in the UK in 2019 were shipped to the EU. It is also specialised. The UK makes twice as many engines as cars and sells them internationally. Supply friction with the EU is a problem. Performance following the Trade and Co-operation Agreement (TCA) with the EU has been poor. For example, transport equipment exports were 11 per cent below TCA levels, far worse than the G7 average fall of 4 per cent, according to International Trade Centre data. But while Brexit has made us poorer, it is not too late to make it work better for Britain. We need to ensure that firms have better access to EU supply chains by making the Northern Ireland Protocol a UKwide arrangement. We also need to open up new markets to our services firms - from banking to business services, education and culture. Britain is the second biggest exporter of services in the world and yet they barely feature in the trade agreements we have signed. A new post-Brexit trade strategy could ride the global services exports wave. It could generate up to £200 billion a year of extra exports by the middle of the next decade, boosting revenues for firms and wages for workers. Load-Date: July 8, 2023  End of Document
