   The delicious symbolism of the Brexit hotel being threatened with demolition The Courier September 4, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 26 Length: 799 words Byline: Helen Brown Body   'm all for a bit of symbolism, me. I That's why I was intrigued and thoroughly tickled to learn that the hotel where the Brexit deal/agreement was signed has been threatened with demolition. Multi-millionaire owner and Conservative Party donor Surinder Arora has apparently been issued with a notice by his local council in leafy Home Counties Surrey to the effect that, he and his company being in breach of planning regulations, the extended building housing the luxury Fairmont Windsor Park Hotel must either be knocked down in part or razed completely. To digress for a mo, I was happily unaware that this particular episode in our great nation's recent history of self-harm was effected - I won't say concluded because, as we all know, Brexit is still the gift that keeps on giving - in a private luxury hotel. But when you come to think of it, what could be more appropriate? Not a major public building or even, heaven forfend, an official adjunct to the seat of government, oh no. A monument to wealth and self-indulgence, with a sidedish of ignoring the law. Go figure. The essence of comedy being timing, I bet Mr Arora is kicking himself for not having hung around a bit longer to make his unauthorised changes. This news has come to light at the very moment Michael Gove, the loftilytitled secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities and minister for intergovernmental relations, has announced the "relaxation" of rules governing waterway pollution levels and preventions in order to ease housebuilding. Measures designed to keep rivers etc clean can now be - and I use this term advisedly - diluted. Which actually means trashed/ignored/ over-ridden and overlooked by people in pursuit of higher profits from admittedly badly-needed, not to say absolutely essential, housing. Considering water companies south of the border are already (or at least, some of their coastal and riverside "customers" are), up to their necks in all kinds of interesting waste products, this does seem to smack of closing the stable door after the horse has not so much bolted, as paused to leave its mark on the landscape while it was at it. Mr Gove is also claiming this forwardlooking move is only achievable because of the wonderful Brexit freedoms occasioned by our leaving of the EU. I don't know about you but I have to say that one of the freedoms I have always dreamed of (not) was the chance to buy and live in a house with a dodgy water supply and the absolute liberty to watch human sewage course through my garden when flooding reaches crisis point. As, with governmental attitudes to climate change being what they are, it inevitably will. But there is something spookily symbolic about what is being done and said here, with the Brexit connection always very much in mind. At least Mr Arora has had the good grace to say he is "truly sorry that mistakes were made" which is more than any of the negotiators ever managed. But you could, without too much twisting of words and turning of coats, be talking about the entire Brexit campaign, with a location (insert "nation") that is "a challenging construction site". And in describing ideal outcomes: "The hotel (insert "nation") is a fantastic property. "We want to ensure it continues serving the local area and bringing significant economic benefits..." Don't hang by the neck waiting, is all. Best of all, however, is that this is taking place in the council area of Runnymede; the site, you may recall from your history lessons, of the signing of that historic document, the Magna Carta. More properly known as the Magna Carta Libertatum, loosely translated - or perhaps that should be freely - as the Great Charter of Freedoms. These days, one might in somewhat jaundiced fashion wonder what freedoms, exactly, since telling the EU to take a hike and "taking back control" hasn't exactly gone swimmingly so far, has it? In Mr Gove's case, it looks like having the freedom to make things worse. And as for poor Mr Arora, I bet he is dreading the day when Suella Braverman finds out about his plight. In her hours of leisure away from positing legislation undermining the right to protest, fulminating against the European Court of Human Rights while simultaneously lobbying to leave the European Convention on same, it can surely only be a matter of time till she's knocking on the Fairmont Windsor's increasingly dilapidated front door, offering to take it off his hands as a home for undeserving migrants. It brings to mind the Twelve Angry Men spoof of Tony Hancock (who unfortunately these days has a name redolent of two somewhat shady politicians) when he declaimed: "Does Magna Carta mean nothing to you? Did she die in vain?" Sometimes, it takes a proper comedian to get the point. Does Magna Carta mean nothing to you? Did she die in vain? Graphic    RIP IT ALL UP: Rishi Sunak and EU president Ursula von der Leyen at the Fairmont Windsor Park Hotel. Load-Date: September 4, 2023  End of Document
