   The "botched" University of Oxford and its exclusive club of "bums": factory of prime ministers and cradle of the Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English November 20, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1245 words Body   Of the seventeen prime ministers that the United Kingdom has had since 1940, thirteen of them have studied at Oxford. It is a good fact to promote this British university especially when you know that of the four who did not, one lived in Edinburgh and the rest chose not to study a career. The recent history of the United Kingdom can be told with this prestigious center as a protagonist and so has one of its former students. "On the yellowed pages of university newspapers in the 1980s are the same faces that today monopolize British news broadcasts."  SIMON KUPER  Simon Kuper (Uganda, 1969), journalist and writer, publishes Amigocracy (Captain Swing), an essay where he dissects the university and tells "how a small caste of Oxford Tories took over the country". "Studying there makes all the difference, proof of which is that it is possible to tell the story of British politicians of the last twenty-five years without having to make hardly any reference to any other university," he writes in the introduction. According to the Financial Times columnist, "on the yellowed pages of university newspapers in the 1980s are the same faces that now monopolize British news broadcasts. Boris Johnson, Michael Gove, David Cameron, George Osborne, Theresa May, Dominic Cummings, Daniel Hannh or Jacob Ress-Mogg have debated each other in tutorials, faced each other in student elections and attended the same balls and black tie dinners. They are not just colleagues: they are partners, rivals, friends. And when they stepped out of the world of student debate onto the national stage, they brought university politics with them."  Lazy, stalkerish and racist It might seem that Oxford is, as most think, a machine for bright, successful students. But Kuper, who entered Oxford to study History and German in the late 1980s - when David Cameron, Boris Johnson, Michael Gove or Jeremy Hunt had just graduated - and who did not come from a public school like most students, portrays this university as a "shoddy institution, full of bums, sexual harassment and racism", where standards were zero, social class essential and where only public speaking was important. He also admits that, to his "dismay", he sees himself reflected in the Oxford Tories: "I also learned how to make a living by writing and speaking from ignorance". According to Kuper's account, social classes were sharpened within the campus. Depending on your major and the effort you put into it, they knew whether you came from a good one or a bad one. "In the Oxbridge [neologism for Oxford and Cambridge universities] chivalric tradition, the more useless the degree, the more elegant it was," he asserts, before talking about the most exclusive of clubs at one of the world's most exclusive universities.  The Bullingdon 'pack "The most famous photograph of Oxford in the 1980s, probably taken in 1987, is a group portrait of David Cameron, Boris Johnson and eight other young men on the steps of a Christ Church College courtyard, dressed in the frock coat, blue bow tie and mustard-colored vest of the Bullingdon club. In the words of commentator Toby Young: The uniform of the ruling class." Kuper adds that it was a transgressive club "only in its fiercely anti-meritocratic character: almost all its members were chosen on the basis of their social origins and gender. They were known for their exhibitionism of privilege". They were high-born hooligans. "Their members moved in packs, rampaging through restaurants or the rooms of new members, bursting bottles in the streets, humiliating sex workers hired for the occasion or pulling down the pants of low-caste outsiders. And if that wasn't enough, they further degraded their commoner victims with financial compensation. The message? 'The rules don't apply to our class'. After all, the Bullingdon members were the ones who were going to dictate the laws in the future." And so it was. Although some of its members are now ashamed of that photo (Cameron and Jonhson have apologized many times for their attitude at the time), membership of this club was a common feature for many of Britain's later leaders. To this and the Oxford Union. "If Johnson, Gove, Hanan, Dominic, Cummings and Rees-Mogg had not been admitted to Oxford at seventeen, Brexit would never have happened."  SIMON KUPER  "The Union was one of the reasons why students interested in politics, especially Tories coming from public school, chose Oxford over Cambridge and explains why Oxford is a specialist in generating prime ministers. From its inception, the debating society functioned as the nursery of the Commons, dominated by Etonians (from the private Eton College)," he explains of this private society where everyone wanted to join and where politicians of the stature of Churchill came to listen to young undergraduates and test their oratory, a quality they consider essential for success. A prominent member of this society was Boris Johnson who fulfilled, as Kuper tells us, the great British dream: to go to Oxford, find a woman at university to marry and become president of the Union.  Humanists... and Euroskeptics A society in which the Euroskepticism of some of the Oxford students can be said to have begun. It was Patrick Robertson, a Scot who had grown up between Paris and Rome, who was one of the first students to openly take a stand against his country's membership of Europe and who approached Thatcher after she, after supporting the creation of the EU, turned against a common currency and an "invasive power" from Brussels. Despite all Robertson's efforts, who used the Union as a loudspeaker and dazzled the prime minister, "Euroscepticism in Oxford was no more than a marginal current" until the 1990s, after the fall of the Berlin Wall and "the refounding of the continent", when these ideas gained considerable strength among the university elite. So much so that, according to Kuper, "if Johnson, Gove, Hanan, Dominic, Cummings and Rees-Mogg had not been admitted to Oxford at the age of seventeen, Brexit would never have happened". Many of the MPs who voted to leave the EU and who came from Oxford had a common feature: they had studied Classical Literature or History, a pattern that Kuper discusses in one of the chapters of his essay. "The most pro-Brexit degree among 2016 MPs was Classical Literature: six of the eight classicists in the House of Commons voted to leave the EU. 'At that time if you came from the right class, Classical Literature was the most common degree,' Kuper asserts. The second was history, "more like British history. They based history on a narrative of the British past. The structure itself was one of high politics, and at the center of this global view, which stretched from Madras to Melbourne, was Westminster." And so the author concludes that most of those who voted in favor had studied degrees that spoke of the past, that alluded to better years with a more authentic, strong and prosperous United Kingdom, and that they belonged to those families that had contributed to the country's history. And he quotes Ivan Rogerts, who studied history at Oxford and was the UK's permanent representative to the European Union until he resigned in 2017, and who saw brexit "as a revolution peculiar to the British ruling class: no plan, no planning. A string of nonsense with that excessive confidence in their own abilities that makes them believe they know the true interests of others better than themselves." Load-Date: November 21, 2023  End of Document
