   This is a witness box, not a soapbox, Covid Inquiry KC tells Sturgeon over Brexit rant Mail on Sunday (London) June 30, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 18 Length: 360 words Byline: Ryan Hooper Body   NICOLA Sturgeon was ordered to get off her 'soapbox' at the Covid Inquiry yesterday after using her time giving evidence to hit out at Brexit. The former Scottish first minister was censured by Hugo Keith KC, the inquiry's lead lawyer, for straying off topic in describing leaving the EU as a 'false economy'. Earlier, she admitted her Holyrood government had not 'got everything right' during the pandemic, while launching a fresh attack on Westminster by criticising the UK approach to the virus as the deaths rose. But it was her politically charged comments about leaving Europe which brought a rebuke from Mr Keith. The lawyer has repeatedly questioned witnesses during the inquiry about the impact of diverting government attention, time and money away from pandemic planning to deal with the possible fallout of a no-deal Brexit. Yesterday, his questions on whether the move was a 'false economy' caused Ms Sturgeon to claim: 'I think every aspect of Brexit has been [a] false economy, if I can put it mildly, but that's another issue altogether.' Mr Keith cut in: 'Ms Sturgeon, I'm so sorry, that is a witness box not a soapbox, and we cannot allow the political debate of Brexit to be ventilated here.' But Ms Sturgeon hit back: 'I think you're asking me questions here that are very germane to the whole issue. So yes, I think it was deeply regrettable that resources had to be diverted from any other area, particularly pandemic preparedness.' She said officials were 'not at all happy' working on Brexit planning because it was 'happening completely against the will of the Scottish government'. But she added: 'To put it bluntly, we had no choice because, had a no-deal Brexit happened... the consequences would have been very severe.' Ms Sturgeon spent just over an hour in the witness box, nearly three weeks after she was arrested and held for seven hours in a police probe involving SNP finances. She has repeatedly stressed her innocence. She said 'one of the points of difference' between the Scottish and the UK government was 'the extent to which we were still seeking to suppress as opposed to live with the virus'. The inquiry continues next week. Graphic    Reprimand: Hugo Keith KC Load-Date: June 30, 2023  End of Document
