   Trading group deal won’t compensate for cost of Brexit Irish News August 1, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 The Irish News Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: A4F1 Length: 337 words Body   T he UK has recently joined one of the world’s largest trading groups – the Comprehensive Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP). This has been hailed by evangelical Brexiteers and the right-wing press as the foundation for a new enhanced global UK economy. Comparisons with EU membership are illuminating. This deal won’t come close to compensating for the cost of Brexit. The Department for International Trade found that it would grow the UK economy by under 1 per cent (peanuts relative to the estimated cost of leaving the EU). The UK will be subject to international courts (similar to the ECJ) setting standards for patents and trade rules within the CPTPP. Brexit advocates are uncharacteristically silent regarding the mantra about restoring UK sovereignty and “regaining control”. It is also axiomatic that international trade works better over shorter distances for pretty obvious logistical and security of supply reasons (intra-European trade beats intra-planetary trade). CPTPP members have little exposure to UK trade largely because they reside on the other side of the globe and consequently prefer to trade with their more accessible neighbours. Indeed some might as well be located on Mars. This deal is, therefore, just one more futile effort by a beleaguered, lame duck UK government to demonstrate that the Brexit project is anything other than a crude con job. The UK electorate have never been allowed to have a grown-up discussion about the merits of Brexit. Instead, they have been fed on a diet of anti-EU propaganda and lies by the xenophobic British press. But most reasonable people would acknowledge that the EU has done much to promote peace, prosperity and democracy across the European continent – especially after the collapse of the Soviet Union. It is therefore unsurprising that, given the grim reality of Brexit, more than 60 per cent of the British electorate now regret leaving the EU. Unfortunately this epiphany came after the referendum. GEORGE WORKMAN Donabate, Co Dublin Load-Date: July 31, 2023  End of Document
