   Tusk facing an uncomfortable period of 'political cohabitation' after Polish victory Irish Independent December 12, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 916 words Byline: JOHN DOWNING Body   It was yet another of Leo Varadkar's public encounters with the "truth serum". He and EU kingpin Donald Tusk had just finished a press conference during which the Polish politician had publicly mused about: "What that special place in hell looks like for those who promoted Brexit, without even a sketch of a plan how to carry it out safely." After the early February 2019 press conference ended, the Taoiseach was picked upon microphone saying: "They'll give you terrible trouble, the British, for this." Tusk nodded and laughed and, as night follows day, there was indignation from London and the Tory-supporting press went into overdrive with an orgy of anti-EU tripe and nonsense, ignoring the simple reality of Tusk's calculated provocative outburst. All in all Donald Tusk, who is due to be installed as new Polish premier this week, proved an excellent friend to Ireland as EU council head during those awful Brexit travails. He infuriated a series of British politicians with statements that any settlement must pass muster with Ireland - and an insistence that issues concerning this country must be dealt with before any talk of EU-UK post-Brexit free trade deals. For the man who was Polish prime minister from 2007 to 2014, and EU Council president chairing leaders' summits from 2014 until 2019, there was a simple logic to his unerring Irish support: the UK had left - but Ireland had stayed. But his often blunt messaging expressed his frustration with the combined heady mix of arrogance and incompetence associated with London's gross mishandling of the separation process. He can expect a warm welcome from EU counterparts who both respect and trust him. But he has it all to do to overcome the legacy of eight years' rule by the nationalistic Law and Justice Party (PiS), which has had very poor relations with the European Union, leading to retrospective questions in key EU capitals about the wisdom of taking in so many former East Bloc communist states in 2004. EU concerns focus on so-called "rule of law" issues which include the independence of the courts, media freedoms, migration and gender equality. These disputes have led to the freezing of vast amounts of EU grants, including post-Covid economic recovery aids. The EU goodwill for Tusk is very helpful but it comes at its own cost. It helps his opponents characterise him as putting foreign interests ahead of those of his own country and allowing the EU to infringe upon Poland's recently won independence. But the 66-year-old former Solidarity radical has walked a long political road thus far. Supporters point to his bravery in the recent election when he fought off efforts to caricature him via state-controlled media in contradictory messaging as a "German stooge" and as someone unduly open to Russian influence. Those supporters also point to his experience trying to guide 28 EU leaders through not just Brexit, but the Greek debt crisis, and the fallout from a major migrant influx in 2015/2016. It honed his political skills to conciliate and forge unlikely compromises. A major bugbear for Tusk will be the shadow left by the outgoing PiS government. Critics say it has gained considerable influence in Polish public administration by activists and supporters gaining key posts. There will also be the difficulty of the Polish president, Andrzej Duda, who is aligned to the PiS, and who gave that party first option on government formation. So-called "political cohabitation" experienced in France in recent decades, always brings headaches for the European Union. Tusk himself came through a period of cohabitation in the years 2007-2010 which hold few happy memories for him. The coming years will prove a stiff test for Tusk and his success or otherwise will have big implications for the EU and Ireland. A crucial test will be his ability to unblock that EU aid which PiS insisted during the election campaign amounted to Brussels' interference in Poland's democratic processes. Despite the positive EU vibes, the message from Brussels is blunt: declarations of intent will not suffice - real action for change is required. Like Ireland, Poland regained its independence in the post-World War I era. Early Irish-Polish diplomatic relations were disrupted by the Cold War era and, for a long time, Dublin clung to the fiction that the only real government for Poland was the one based in exile in London, meaning changes came slowly. An important moment on the road for change came on September 30, 1979, with a meeting between exiled Poles in Ireland and the world's most celebrated Pole, Pope John Paul II, at the papal nunciature in Dublin. Finally, as the accession of Poland to the European Union looked increasingly inevitable, a new Polish embassy opened on Ailesbury Road in Dublin in December 1991. Relations between Ireland and Poland remain very important - not least because more than 120,000 Polish people live and work here amounting to almost 3pc of the population. That of itself is remarkable when you consider that up to that papal visit in 1979, there were only a handful of Polish people in Ireland, but EU expansion changed all that. So, the new Polish leader, and friend of Ireland in time of need, will carry much Irish goodwill with him as he sets out on a new and perilous political journey. Tusk, who is due to be installed as new Polish prime minister this week, proved an excellent friend to Ireland as EU council head during those awful Brexit travails. He infuriated a series of British politicians Graphic    Donald Tusk celebrates the exit poll results during Poland's parliamentary elections on October 15, in Warsaw, Poland. Photo: Getty Load-Date: December 12, 2023  End of Document
