   UK to rejoin EU's Horizon science programme following post-Brexit row The National (Scotland) September 7, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 874 words Byline: Adam Robertson Body   THE UK is to return to the European Union-s 85 billion Horizon science research programme following a post-Brexit row. The UK Government has said a -bespoke- new agreement has been signed off with the EU, with researchers now able to apply for grants and take part in Horizon projects. Humza Yousaf (below) had previously urged Rishi Sunak to end the -needless uncertainty- surrounding the UK-s involvement in the programme. It had continued to participate under the post-Brexit trade deal but was frozen out in a tit-for-tat retaliation in a dispute over Northern Ireland agreements. The move was immediately welcomed by scientists, after years of warnings that UK researchers have been missing out on collaboration with colleagues in the EU. Horizon is a collaboration involving Europe-s leading research institutes and technology companies. EU member states contribute funds, which are then allocated to individuals or organisations on merit to explore subjects such as climate change, medical advances and artificial intelligence. It had been hoped that a British return to Horizon would follow in the wake of the Windsor Framework deal, agreed in February and designed to address concerns over post-Brexit arrangements in Northern Ireland. The breakthrough comes after months of talks between London and Brussels. The Government said the UK will associate with the Horizon programme, as well as the EU-s space programme, Copernicus. But it will not take part in the bloc-s nuclear technology scheme, Euratom. READ MORE: Scottish Labour catch up to SNP on vote share in new Westminster poll -Innovation has long been the foundation for prosperity in the UK, from the breakthroughs improving healthcare to the technological advances growing our economy,- Sunak said. -With a wealth of expertise and experience to bring to the global stage, we have delivered a deal that enables UK scientists to confidently take part in the world-s largest research collaboration programme - Horizon Europe.- The Prime Minister spoke to European Commission President Ursula Von der Leyen in a call on Wednesday. Science Secretary Michelle Donelan said the Horizon programme is -unrivalled in its scope-, adding that it is a -fantastic day- for British science and technology. Under the terms of the deal, the UK will not need to pay into the scheme for the two years it was absent. British costs under the programme will begin again in January 2024. Newly-appointed shadow science secretary Peter Kyle told broadcasters that ministers now need to -get on with it-. -What we-re missing out on is two years- worth of innovation. -Two years of global companies looking around the world for where to base their research centres and choosing other countries than Britain, because we are not part of Horizon- This is two years of wasted opportunity for us as a country,- the Labour MP said. The UK Government also pointed to the inclusion of a so-called -clawback- mechanism in the deal, which will mean that the UK will be compensated if British scientists receive significantly less money than the UK puts into the programme. News of the deal was swiftly welcomed by scientists and researchers. Universities UK President Professor Sally Mapstone said: -Allowing our scientists to work together, irrespective of borders, is in all of our interests. -Our universities will now do everything possible to ensure the UK rapidly bounces back towards previous levels of participation and is able to secure genuine value, delivering the wealth of research opportunities available.- Elsewhere, president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh Sir John Ball said he was "delighted" with the news. "As Scotland's national academy, The Royal Society of Edinburgh is delighted that the Prime Minister has reached an agreement that will secure UK institutions' access to Horizon Europe funding", he said. "It is not only a financial support mechanism, but ensures easier and more fruitful scientific collaboration, which we will all benefit from. "I believe that UK institutions will breathe a sigh of relief at this news, and now we can all focus our collective intellectual mettle on the challenges at hand." READ MORE: Slovakia's elections show why 'nationalism' often gets a bad name Sir Adrian Smith, president of the Royal Society, called it -fantastic news-. -Science has so much to offer in terms of tackling global challenges and improving lives. Today the Government and the EU have given that a big boost.- Michelle Mitchell, chief executive of Cancer Research UK, said it would be -overwhelmingly in the best interests of cancer patients and scientists-. Writing on Twitter/X Scottish Culture Secretary Angus Robertson said: "After a two-year damaging and unnecessary departure from Horizon Europe the UK has rejoined. "Now it should U-turn on Erasmus+ student exchange." Independence campaigner and National columnist Lesley Riddoch also welcomed the news but said other sectors would want the impact of Brexit fixed. She said: "Scientists are back in Horizon EU research prog - great. But I'll bet every other sector wants the terrible damage of Brexit nullified for them too. "Especially hospitality, farming, NHS, care etc etc. But no change from Sunak or Starmer. Only solution for Scots is independence." Load-Date: September 7, 2023  End of Document
