   UK's no longer the sick man of Europe..thanks to Brexit The Express July 25, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 749 words Byline: Stephen Pollard Body   UNLESS you're of a certain age, the words Bretton Woods may mean nothing to you. And yet for anyone who lived through the post-war years, from the 1940s to the 1970s, the words (which described the international economic system) were ubiquitous - and almost as commonly bandied about as Brexit is today. One day that word - Brexit - will also be history, and the political wars which are still being fought over it will also be, when we start to take for granted our status as a self-governing, independent nation and forget the raging controversy. Until then, however, almost everything is still viewed through the prism of Brexit. Remember how in the referendum debate, Remainers pointed to a future in which a prosperous, politically mainstream Europe would stand in opposition to an impoverished, extremist Britain? Many push the same line, seven years later. Today, however, we have the evidence of the world around us. We have facts. And those facts show how wrong the Remainers were and how lucky we are not to be dragged down by our membership of the EU. POLITICALLY, it is Europe which threatens to lurch to the extremes, while we return to a contest within the mainstream. Take Sunday's election in Spain. The polls predicted the collapse of the Socialist-led coalition, in which the larger party was joined by a variety of variously bizarre and smaller hard- Left parties. The result saw the coalition take a large hit, but although the alternative - the mainstream conservative party, putatively joined by the hard-Right Vox - is likely to form the next government, it did not sweep the board. Vox actually dropped from 52 to 33 seats. Spain, however, represents everything we are so lucky to have avoided. Neither mainstream party can win an election, and both increasingly depend on alliances with more extreme parties. We have of course had our own experience of an extreme party that's not on the fringes - at our last election, when Labour was led by Jeremy Corbyn and the hard Left flocked to support him. The result was Labour's biggest drubbing since the 1930s. It's hardly fashionable to praise our current bunch of politicians. But it says much about the healthy state of our political debate that the next election will be between parties led by Rishi Sunak and Keir www.Starmer.No one would ever call them inspiring. But they are both patently decent - and no one could call them extremist. What a contrast with what's happening on the Continent, where almost everywhere extremist or populist parties are on the rise. This trend that has many causes - not least a feeling of powerlessness in the face of a political establishment that seems to treat voters' concerns as somehow illegitimate. It's instructive to see how the same political forces can lead in different directions, as here that feeling was one of the key factors behind Brexit. On the Continent, countries in the Eurozone are now officially in recession. GDP in the single-currency bloc fell by 0.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2023 and the final three months of 2022. Germany was described last month by one leading Financial Times writer as "the sick man of Europe". The causes behind the rise of the far-Right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) party in Germany are varied, but the sense of economic drift is one of them - as is the refugee crisis. The AfD now seems closer to power (within a coalition) than any such party has been in Germany since 1945. The hard-Right Finns Party has joined a coalition in Finland, its sister party the Sweden Democrats is also in power and last month in Greece neo-Nazi Spartiates (Spartans) won 12 seats. THE recent race riots in France exposed the fragility of its mainstream politics. The far-Right, with Marine Le Pen, has after all contested the run-off in the past two presidential elections. The UK has its own problems, but across Europe the likes of AfD are on the rise - whereas even our third party the LibDems, a dumping ground for protest votes, is moderate. The ongoing Brexit battles may be tiresome and dated, but at some point they will be a curiosity of history. And a look at Europe today shows why. It used to be Britain that was called the sick man of Europe. But it's not us who are in recession or suffering soaring unemployment. Our inflation rate is now falling, and with the freedom to negotiate trade deals with areas seeing a huge economic expansion, our prospects after Brexit are exciting. 'Almost everywhere extremist or populist parties are on the rise' Graphic    BACK STEPS: The revived far-Right and recession are spectres haunting GermanyPicture: HEIKO REBSCH/PICTURE-ALLIANCE/DPA/AP IMAGES Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
