   United in joy by the infinite losing run at Old Trafford Sunday Independent December 31, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 1301 words Byline: Declan Lynch Body   Have they turned the corner? With that electrifying comeback to beat Aston Villa 3-2 at home, and the sale of a 25pc stake in the club to the Brexit-supporting billionaire Sir Jim Ratcliffe, the last days of the year have brought some solace to Manchester United. Yet their supporters are now so broken they feel they've been down at the proverbial Mondello Park for about 10 years now, with the turning of each new corner still leaving them on the same old track. Round and round they go, celebrating these late winners against the Villa - or even Fulham or Brentford - with the kind of delirium they once knew as champions of England and Europe. It is indeed a compliment to the greatness of United as a global institution that this decade of despondency their supporters have been enduring has brought such simple pleasure to almost everyone on Earth who does not support them. This is not a small thing. I could probably fill this newspaper with the collected tweets of people saying their lives may be difficult in many ways but the one thing that lifts their mood or just gives them a laugh is watching United losing in some extraordinary way that they've never lost before - apparently without even trying. There's no doubt about this - the world is a happier place all round when Manchester United are bad, as they have been for such an unfathomable length of time. If they were somehow to get good that last little shaft of light in the lives of multitudes might well be extinguished. But what are the chances of that happening? Well, the main thing that strikes us about the Brexit-supporting billionaire Sir Jim Ratcliffe is that he was Brexit-supporting. He supported it, at least, for other people. As for himself, the head of the INEOS group lives in Monte Carlo, and his most meaningful contribution to old England in recent times is to invest in this football club which has always thrived on being proudly internationalist - United played in the European Cup in the 1950s against the insular objections of many in the English game. The Premier League itself is probably the ultimate illustration of how much better England does when it isn't overly English. But the main thing about Sir Jim Ratcliffe being a Brexit-supporting billionaire is that Brexit was perhaps the worst idea in the history of the world. And if you're a deeply troubled football club looking for a saviour, on the whole you'd probably want to be looking at someone with better taste in the Big Ideas department. But then that kind of thing doesn't seem to bother our friends in the corporate world. It didn't bother United's former CEO, Ed Woodward, an accountant whose acumen in that area somehow did not translate into an ability to sign the right footballers for United - indeed many of them were so wrong there were times when United could have fielded a World XI Bad Lads selection. And since the corporate bullshit over which Woodward presided was behind much of the decline of the grand old club, it is almost beyond belief that Sir Jim Ratcliffe is bringing to United the skillset of Sir Dave Brailsford - without question, and against the most ferocious opposition, the supreme grand master of corporate bullshit of the 21st century. Sir Dave created a vast sprawling infrastructure of the stuff, to explain how he had turned British cycling into a crushing machine which destroyed all opposition at the Olympic Games and later at the Tour de France with Team Sky. He invented a concept now beloved of boardroom generals, of "marginal gains" - essentially he reasoned that if you improved every aspect of your cycling operation by 1pc, the cumulative effect would make all the difference. Which it did, allegedly, despite the Brits with their extra 1pc being up against a broader culture of doping which - you might have assumed - would already have added a few percentage points to the overall performance. With Sir Dave on the case at Old Trafford, they'll be hearing a lot of words like "data" and seeing a lot of Venn diagrams. And if that's the extra 1pc they'll be gaining, they'll probably still be needing something a bit stronger from the old medicine cabinet to give themselves that crucial edge. All of which means that many of us can still reasonably expect to be gaining our 1pc of superior mental health which comes from watching United getting beaten by Bournemouth, at home. We never dreamed it could go on for so long. There were times under the brutal and seemingly endless tyranny of Alex Ferguson when, if you'd offered us the 10 months alone of David Moyes's tragic reign, we'd have bitten your arm off - now we've had the best part of 10 years of it, and if anything we are hungrier than ever for failure on this truly tremendous scale. The world - most of it anyway - wants another year of this. And another one after that. The world needs it. Warning of impending apocalypse by horsemen The new Gambling Regulation Bill, which proposes a ban on betting advertising during the hours when horse racing takes place, is getting some pushback from the racing industry. The great Ruby Walsh was on RTÉ's Leopardstown coverage, warning that this might mean the end of Racing TV's and Sky Sports' At The Races coverage of Irish racing, with drastic effects for the industry and for the country in general. And fair dues to Ruby, he also declared his interest both as a Racing TV contributor and an ambassador for Paddy Power. Unfortunately there was no one to push back on the pushback, because viewers might have heard Junior Minister James Browne saying he hasn't seen any evidence of Racing TV's estimate of (EURO)2m a year that this supposedly will cost them. And that it's straightforward now to create an Irish stream to conform with Irish laws. Indeed it is still unclear how in the great scheme such relatively small numbers could be all that stands between Irish racing and this apocalypse that some in the game are predicting. In the few seconds since you started reading this article, the aforementioned Paddy Power and other betting corporations have probably made a couple of million from their vast enterprises. According to the minister, anything you can see in a horse race today, you can see when the legislation passes. It can still be called the Paddy Power Cup or whatever, indeed if anything the legislation has already received some serious pushback from the bookies in their relentless way. Ruby went on to say that to reform gambling, mainly "you have to reform people… monitoring their habits, keeping an eye on them… banning advertising is not enough". No, but it would be a start. And the line about "reforming people" reminds us that the betting corporations are loath to concede that they themselves must be reformed - their systems are inherently addictive, yet they keep insisting this is mainly about personal responsibility, not corporate responsibility. So if you're puzzled by this apparent overreaction to the legislation's effect on Racing TV and At The Races, just bear in mind the absolute commitment of the corporations to holding back the tide of regulation for as long as is humanly possible. You'd almost admire their bloody-mindedness in this regard. Almost. Far right have never been in the solutions game Still in the land of pushback, the Taoiseach says the Government will need to push back on farright myths about migration. He is correct, but to make it even clearer in the coming year it is important not to even associate the problems of migration, or any other problem, with the far right. They are the problem. Indeed, with their foreign anti-vaxxer ideology they may already have brought a problem to the long-term health of this country. They have no solution to anything that any sane person might want, because they are not in the solution game. They are the problem. Graphic    Jim Ratcliffe, above, now has a stake in Old Trafford. Picture by Peter Byrne/PA. Below, the jockey Ruby Walsh Load-Date: December 31, 2023  End of Document
