   United Kingdom: further postponement of the entry into force of post-Brexit health checks CE Noticias Financieras English August 30, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 514 words Body   In October 2023, the United Kingdom was due to introduce health controls on products from the European Union and on certain so-called "risky" products, such as those of animal origin, as a result of Brexit. But on Tuesday, August 29, the government announced the postponement of these controls. By Emeline Vin, RFI London Correspondent Officially,the postponement comes two months before the entry into force of the controls, so as not to increase the price of products imported from the European Union. The controls mean longer journeys, more bureaucracy and therefore more expensive imports. The United Kingdom is immersed in a serious economic crisis, with inflation set to reach 10% this year. That is the official reason, but importers are not prepared either: the exact procedures for controls, duty rates and the necessary paperwork are not yet known. For this reason, the government is giving companies - and itself - three more months to get everything organized. In addition, on Tuesday, August 29, it presented a new computerized system for border control of goods. The last reason is the timing, as elections will be held next year - it is not yet known exactly when - and the Conservative government is expected to lose. So, if the introduction of controls were to lead to higher prices or supply problems, it would be another election argument for the Labour opposition. British producers feel disadvantaged On the face of it, there is no disadvantage in not carrying out these controls. The postponement comes at the request of importers, who feared they would be unprepared for the start of the controls. And it does not change much: it is just a continuation of the status quo, with European products continuing to occupy supermarket shelves at the same price, or at least without over-inflation. Next, the main drawback affects producers, who feel at a disadvantage. The UK continues to import European products, which they see as competition. As London refuses to commit to continuing to meet European standards, British producers can no longer really export to the European Union. As long as these phytosanitary controls are not implemented, they feel that European imports are favored over the domestic market.   Fears ahead of the general election The Government is concerned about the consequences of the controlsin the run-up to next year's general election. Officially, the controls are due to apply from January, but a further postponement would come as no surprise: it is already the fifth in two years. Which raises a question: more than seven years after the vote, three years after the official exit from the European Union, what is Brexit? Indeed, it has become an almost taboo word in the United Kingdom. From time to time, the government publishes a bill to "replace this or that European law", especially on the environment, but it remains difficult to obtain reliable data on the consequences, especially economic, of Brexit. Especially since it has arrived almost at the same time as the pandemic. This vagueness complicates the definition of Brexit in 2023. Load-Date: August 31, 2023  End of Document
