   Voters show signs of Brexit regret seven years on i-news July 18, 2023 SC1 Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 342 words Byline: Richard Vaughan Body   The majority of Britons would vote to rejoin the EU in a major shift in opinion against Brexit seven years after the referendum, polling shows. A survey of adults by YouGov shows that 51 per cent of people would vote to re-enter the EU, the highest the pollster has recorded since the 2016 referendum. Asked how they would vote if a second referendum were to be held now, the proportion of those opting for "rejoin" rises to 55 per cent, while just 31 per cent said they would vote Leave. The figure rises substantially when the number of "don't knows" is removed, showing 61 per cent in favour rejoining the bloc, as opposed to just 39 per cent against. The pollster said that the rise in calls for the UK to reverse the Brexit decision among 18- to 24-year-olds, who were too young to vote in the initial referendum, could lead to demands for the issue of Brexit to be revisited in the future. The survey is just the latest in a rising trend among the electorate showing "Bregret" as the economic picture worsens and holidaymakers face lengthy queues at the border. Even among Leavers there has been a sharp increase in people saying they made the wrong decision, with 18 per cent expressing regret at their decision to vote Leave, as opposed to just 8 per cent in 2021. In May, polling by BMG for i showed 49 per cent would rejoin the EU, as opposed to 36 per cent saying they would remain outside. It followed a separate poll in April by Redfield and Wilton that showed 56 per cent in favour of rejoining the bloc, compared with 37 per cent against. Beth Kühnel Mann, political researcher at YouGov, said there has been a "clear trend" since 2021 of Brits "turning on Brexit", as she pointed out that 70 per cent of the public believed the Government had handled the UK's exit "badly". "The 51 per cent of the public who say they would vote to rejoin is the highest we have recorded since the 2016 vote," she said. "And, with this figure rising to 62 per cent among 18-24-year-olds it may be that calls to revisit the issue grow stronger in the coming years." Load-Date: July 17, 2023  End of Document
