   Warring PMs must[...] The Express June 12, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 463 words Byline: Patrick O'Flynn Body   IN THE statement accompanying his sensational decision to stand down as an MP, Boris Johnson warned of a plot to undo Brexit. Yet the biggest threat to Brexit by far is the possible election of a Labour-led government next year. That is just one reason why a peacemaker of sufficient clout in the Tory hierarchy needs to stitch together an accord between Mr Johnson and Prime Minister Rishi Sunak.They will never be best friends, but if their current spat sets into permanent open hostilities by the election, voters are likely to turn away from the party in droves. And with Labour in power, perhaps in partnership with the even more anti-Brexit Liberal Democrats, one can expect steps to re-entangle Britain in Brussels regulations.Although Sir Keir Starmer has assured readers of this newspaper that under him the UK's future is outside the EU and its customs union, single market and free movement obligations, nobody who recalls his old broken Brexit vows will take that on trust. There are plenty of things that Labour could do to begin a long march back into the orbit of Brussels, short of rejoining key institutions. For a start, they could revive elements of Theresa May's fake deal, envisaging a "high alignment" regulatory future. While Mr Johnson did not go so far as to accuse Mr Sunak - who supported the Leave cause before the referendum - of being part of a plot to "reverse" Brexit, he did imply that the PM cannot be trusted to resist it with any vigour. He demanded to know why the Sunak administration had "so passively abandoned the prospect of a free trade deal with the US" and "junked measures…to scrap EU directives". In fact, as soon as Joe Biden was elected US President, the prospect of a free trade deal was dead in the water and no British premier could have pulled it off. And the slowing down of the scrapping of EU laws was a decision taken by yet another Brexiteer, the Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch. She feared a sudden "bonfire of regulations" could go horribly wrong and give Brexit a bad name. Some Brexit ultras on the Tory benches believe Sunak'sWindsor Framework for Northern Ireland trading arrangements limit the scope for future regulatory divergence with Brussels. But equally, there is a strong argument that calming the situation in the province helps to cement Brexit in place rather than unpick it. Brexit's durability will at some point be tested by a government made up almost entirely of MPs who voted Remain. Delaying that test will mean bringing in more changes allowed by Brexit but banned by Brussels, such as axing VAT from domestic energy bills. Unless Mr Sunak and Mr Johnson learn to live with each other, Brexit will be in the hands of its enemies before the end of next year.And neither man would find it easy to live that down. Graphic    Warning…Patrick O'Flynn Load-Date: June 12, 2023  End of Document
