   When EastEnders went WOKE: As viewers tire of 'virtue signalling' storylines... how climate change, Brexit and teen pregnancies led to questions over the show's future MailOnline July 7, 2023 Friday 2:01 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: EASTENDERS; Version:1 Length: 906 words Byline: Melody Fletcher For Mailonline Body   The future of EastEnders has reportedly been called into question following the show's increasingly 'woke' storylines.  From climate change to Brexit to many other socially-conscious threads, it has been claimed that viewers are growing increasingly tired of the changes, while social media users have made their thoughts resoundingly clear.  Disgruntled fans took to Twitter to pen 'Never seen it in years..... they have all gone Woke!... Wokerdale and stopoilnation street are just as bad...  'The virtue signaling must be thru the roof these days with that #trash... EastEnders like all the modern soaps became unwatchable when they stopped entertaining & started educating'.  So what are EastEnders 'wokest' moments to date? CLIMATE CHANGE  And in 2021 schoolgirl character Bailey Baker stood outside Walford East station and urged the residents to sign a petition for meat-free Mondays. She said: 'Global mass-produced industrial meat is killing the planet is literally killing the planet. One meat-free day a week is one step to saving the world. You need to start local, and think global. Small changes make a big difference.' Her message was later tweeted by the official EastEnders' account, which drew criticism from viewers including several claiming this wokeness was why they no longer watch. In 2022 meanwhile, the show featured a special one-off credit showing a map of London's East End and the River Thames, bursting its banks.  Other parts of London then appeared under water, in what was a depiction of how London will look if action isn't taken soon. The map zooms out to a satellite image of the Arctic, accompanied by a voiceover of David Attenborough saying: 'This isn't a reality now, but our future will be determined by what happens here.'  Soon after the storylines aired, fans took to Twitter to pen: 'In the wake of the storyline, fans took to Twitter to pen: '#EastEnders Keep climate change out of this programme. There is no escape from it!...  'They decided to bring Sean back and expect people to care about climate change lmaooooo #EastEnders... Nope, I found it bloody annoying. I don't want to be preached to about climate change, while watching Eastenders!...  BREXIT = COVID  Last year there was some upset when Brexit was likened to the Covid pandemic by Sharon Watts in EastEnders programme. She threw a drink in rival Sam Michell's face and declared: 'We've had Brexit and Covid, we don't need you here'. Following the scene, fans flooded Twitter in a rage - with accusations about impartiality from the BBC, saying the network is 'warping' Britain.  One viewer penned: 'CCS report: EastEnders portrayed a character equating Brexit & coronavirus Leitita Dean's Sharon Watts throws water in another character's face saying: 'We've had Brexit & Covid, we dont need u here'... 'Likening Brexit to Covid! Outrageous politics BBC warping modern Britain... Just caught the tail end of Eastenders - never watch it but used to 30 years ago... 'Sharon was having a row with Sam (?) and said (rowing) "we've had Brexit and Covid, we don't need you!" Interesting take from the Beeb! TEENAGE PREGNANCY  Back in March, the BBC was criticised for screening a 'sick' plot about a girl who becomes pregnant at just 12. Teenagers were gripped by the storyline in which Lily Slater discovers she is expecting and decides to have the baby - with millions watching clips on the social media app TikTok. In the soap, Lily's mother Stacey, played by Lacey Turner, encourages the schoolgirl to keep her baby, while the parents of the father - who is also 12 - try to get her to have an abortion. Lily, portrayed by Lillia Turner, agrees to a termination, but changes her mind just before she is admitted to hospital. Sources close to EastEnders say the dramatic scenes will continue with the youngster having the baby. Enraged viewers wrote: ''What made them think this story line with Lily was a good idea it's f**king disgusting... Is EastEnders ever gonna start treating the lily storyline how they should or is a 12 year old being pregnant just all fun and cute now?... 'Stacey Slater spoilin' that Lily with ice cream! Should be punishin' 'er for not keepin' 'er legs together if you asks me... Why are #EastEnders normalising teenage pregnancies? Lily and Ricky Jr are practically babies themselves!...  'Are they going to make Lily and Ricky an actual couple or are we going to see children try and co-parent?... Every single thing to do with Lily and this awful pregnancy storyline makes me roll my eyes. I just can't with it...  'Why are they trying to normalise lily's pregnancy sl stop like they are 12 yrs old fgs. Why are #EastEnders normalising teenage pregnancies? Lily and Ricky Jr are practically babies themselves!' LGBTQ AWARENESS  In 2009, Syed Masood (Marc Elliot) arrived on the show, battling with his Muslim faith and sexuality. He became attracted to chef Christian Clarke (John Partridge), despite his relationship with girlfriend Amira (Preeya Kalidas). He later announced to Christian that he was in love with him - but feeling pressure from his family, he goes ahead with getting married to Amira. Later, in 2019, the first lesbian Muslim character was introduced with Iqra Ahmed, played by Priya Davdra, arrived in Walford with her sister Habiba (Rukku Nahar) having run away from an arranged marriage. Her family go on to join her in Walford - the soap's first-ever Punjabi Sikh family - and Ash reveals she is bisexual.  Load-Date: July 7, 2023  End of Document
