   Whisky industry faced problems but quality of products remains high Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 21, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 14,15 Length: 388 words Body   SCOTLAND'S whisky industry has sometimes seemed immune from the economic turmoil which has gripped other sectors Since Brexit. While the Scottish and UK economies were battered by Brexit, then Covid, then the war in Ukraine and the cost-of-living crisis, our national drink has continued to thrive. But Brexit has still hit the whisky industry in a number of damaging ways. At the independent GlenAllachie distillery , near Aberlour in Speyside, lead tour guide Karen Burgess told of challenges the firm faces, particularly with supply shortages. At one point, GlenAllachie was facing a lead time of up to six months for ordering cardboard. Burgess said: "For a while, we couldn't get access to cardboard cartons for glasses and bottles, and the glass bottles themselves. "We got there, but it was tricky. It has taken a bit of time." Shortages arose from Brexit trading complications, with the shortfall of HGV drivers exacerbated in the UK by Brexit. In addition, there was a boom in online shopping sparked by Covid, putting strain on cardboard supplies. The distillery said the "biggest impact" to its business had been the extra paperwork resulting from leaving the EU single market and customs union. However, due to the firm's experience in exporting to other countries." around the world, they adapted quickly . But they said post- Brexit free trade agreements struck by the UK Government with other countries." such as Australia and India had "not significantly" helped them yet, despite being sold as a boon for the whisky industry. Meanwhile, the perfect storm of Brexit, the pandemic and soaring fuel costs has hit the company. GlenAllachie said the cost to ship had "spiked" and is only slowly recovering now. However, exports to the EU have not suffered overall thanks to the enduring popularity of whisky overseas . GlenAllachie owner Billy Walker said: "We wouldn't want to speculate on the wider industry but for GlenAllachie the impact of Brexit has been neutral. We haven't suffered as a result but nor have we benefited." Experts reckon the weak pound caused by Brexit has fuelled demand for whisky abroad, pushing exports even higher despite the Brexit chaos. Overseas sales soared to a record £6.2billion last year. And the Scotch Whisky Association said the industry had "adjusted well" to post-Brexit trading arrangements. Graphic    HARD GRAFT Worker Jason McWilliam at GlenAllachie. Pic: Tony Nicoletti Load-Date: June 21, 2023  End of Document
