   Who thinks Brexit has been a success? South Wales Echo August 17, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 572 words Byline: Lawrence Bailey Lawrence Bailey Body   I'D never heard the expression "Bregret" until I read a Wales Online article by Will Hayward about how a majority want a rethink over leaving the European Union. This story matches last month's Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) report which says two-thirds of the UK public think the move has damaged the economy, while even among Leave voters, only one in five believe the impact has been positive. Meanwhile the people who brought you Brexit (Farage, Cummings and Johnson) have all exited the bus under less than positive circumstances. My take is that when you break it all down, the "taking back control" messages successfully focused on three aspects: trade, immigration and investment. As regards trade, the argument was to break free of "restrictive" EU rules and open up new lucrative markets. The result was that we reintroduced significant barriers between the UK and its largest trading www.partner.No replacement deal reached so far has got close to matching the advantages we previously held. If anything, the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) states that trade as a proportion of GDP has fallen significantly below that of other advanced economies since Brexit. The other big idea was to end free movement, and there's no doubt that this has happened. Net immigration from the EU, which once peaked at over 200,000 a year at the time of the referendum, is now negative. On the other hand, overall net migration in 2022 was 606,000. The highest on record. Finally you have investment - the idea that Britain would suddenly be attractive to overseas backers. It never happened. To be fair, the relatively low level of business investment in theUK pre-dated Brexit, but assessments are that performance is 10% lower than it would have been. Other indicators tell a similar story of decline. At the end of last year, the country's productivity was less than 2% higher than before the referendum. The equivalent EU trend shows a 6% improvement. Anyway, whatever interim benefits might have briefly popped up, they were effectively trashed by the Truss government whose stab at fantasy economics added to an already staggering budget deficit. In other words - and if stats are not your thing - the bottom line is that this is probably not the Brexit that the majority voted for. And if that's the case, then why all the reticence to test opinion on returning, especially from the likes of Kier Starmer? The political reality is that while Britain may have taken a wrong turn in 2016, the underlying disillusionment with government institutions that prompted that seismic decision hasn't gone away. If anything, subsequent events have only strengthened distrust of the so-called political class. The collapse of the "red wall" constituencies where Leave was the dominant sentiment remains a bitter reminder for Labour strategists. A prevailing view is that things need to progress slowly and that ten years on (2026) would be sufficient time. Intriguingly, the survey I mentioned right at the start revealed that only a minority think there's a need for an immediate referendum. In the meantime a residual hope survives among the "No Bregrets" contingent that the mechanics can still be made to work - even if the result means separation in name only. It remains to be seen if politicians and the public can finally manage to get on the same page. I can't help feeling though that three years may not be enough. www.whiterock.wales Graphic    Reports suggest many people now regret voting for Brexit as the benefits promised have not materialised Load-Date: October 31, 2023  End of Document
