   Who is I-m A Celebrity star Nigel Farage? His role as an MEP and ITV jungle fee Oxford Mail November 15, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 525 words Byline: Molly Court Body   The line-up for I'm A Celebrity-Get Me Out Of Here! 2023 has been revealed including none other than former Member of the European Parliament (MEP) Nigel Farage. The 59-year-old will be hoping he has what it takes to become the next king of the jungle as he could be facing the famous public vote for gruesome Bushtucker trials. After stepping away from politics and the Brexit Party a few years ago, Farage is now a regular presenter on GB News. But he will now be ditching his prime-time TV slot and heading into one of ITV-s most anticipated shows of the year. Farage will be joining the likes of This Morning-s Josie Gibson, First Dates star Fred Sirieix and Britney Spears- sister Jamie Lynn Spears to name a few. As he heads to Australia, let-s take a look at how much he is expected to be paid for his I-m A Celebrity stint and find out more about his political history including UKIP and Brexit. Was Nigel Farage an MP?  Farage has never been an MP but he has been a member of the European Parliament from 1999 until 2020, dedicating just over 20 years of his career in politics to this role. From 2006 to 2009, he led the UK Independence Party (UKIP) - he then gave it another go from 2010 to 2016. But it was in 2019 when he launched the Brexit Party after former Prime Minister Theresa May and the EU agreed to delay Britain-s departure from the European Union. Every winner of I'm A Celebrity through the years When Brexit finally went ahead, Farage rebranded the -Brexit Party- as -Reform UK-, which he is currently the Honorary President of after stepping down as leader in 2021. In a statement on the Reform UK website at the time, he said this was due to -reflecting on my role and my life over the course of the next few years-. How much will Nigel Farage be paid for I-m A Celebrity?  Recent reports suggest that Farage is allegedly being paid a staggering 1.5 million to enter the jungle, according to the Mail Online. This would make him the highest-paid campmate in the history of the series. Meet the 10 brave Celebrities who are heading to the infamous Australian Jungle this Sunday at 9pm. #ImACeleb -\xEF pic.twitter.com/1Qjc8kAizz - I'm A Celebrity... (@imacelebrity) November 13, 2023 In 2018, former Deal or No Deal host Noel Edmonds became the highest earner for taking part in the show (even if it was only for nine days) - he reportedly made 600,000. What are the beliefs of UKIP?  According to the Reform UK, formerly named UKIP website, the party-s -Statement of Principles- is as follows: Patriotism National Democracy Political Democracy Economic Democracy Liberalism & Traditionalism To conclude, it explains: -UKIP is a patriotic and democratic party that believes in Britain, its people, and its future as a great and positive power in the modern world. -We want to keep the best of the past but look forward to using our traditional values to meet the challenges of the future. -The first duty of any government is to protect its people. This includes not just military defence and policing but also having effective border controls and preventing invasive immigration. -Our current political leaders are in gross dereliction of their duty.- Load-Date: November 15, 2023  End of Document
