   Why are we still waiting? The Journal (Newcastle, UK) October 10, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 18 Length: 332 words Body   YOU know when you are waiting and waiting, expecting something to happen. On and on. Check your watch. Still nothing. Have you mixed up the dates? So frustrating! Just like the predicted Brexit-driven hit to the UK economy. When I voted to leave it was in the full knowledge that there would be short-term costs. Common sense dictates that making business transactions a bit more complicated will have some negative effects on the sector. And there were all those highly persuasive predictions from our economic masters. My question is - where's the actual evidence to justify project fear? The short-term hit to export volumes was barely noticeable and they rapidly returned to pre-Brexit levels. Confounding the doom-sayers. A few jobs were relocated into mainland Europe. They have been more than replaced by the creation of new ones. Unemployment rates have remained stubbornly low contradicting those economists whose predictions, as we can now appreciate, were way off the mark. And now we have further evidence. Despite the firmest of predictions, new GDP numbers show the UK to be largely in step with the performance of EU member states. Indeed with Germany in recession having taken on the old British role of "the sick man of Europe" the predicted Brexit hit is in serious danger of turning into a Brexit dividend! Few would argue that the UK economy has become weak. But the idea that this has anything whatsoever to do with Brexit simply doesn't stand up to a moment's scrutiny. Were the economists who predicted Brexit disaster lying? I think not. Mathematical models work best when predicting a future based on an understanding of similar past events. As Brexit was unprecedented the chances of coming up with an accurate description of how the UK economy would perform in the future was low. Mind you, all things considered, it would have been nice of those economists to warn us that their judgements were based on little more than semi-educated guess work! John Hodgkins, Seaton Sluice Load-Date: October 10, 2023  End of Document
