   Will the UK reverse Brexit in 2026? Why popular consultations don't fix anything CE Noticias Financieras English August 25, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1224 words Body    When analyzing the decade of the seventeenth century in which the Crown was abolished in the United Kingdom, historians agree that one of the elements that led to the failure of this period was the fact that, from the beginning, no one had intended to establish a republic, and this, in a way, was established by accident. Moreover, even after the execution of Charles I, there was no consensus on what was to be done. Finally, with Charles II came the Restoration and today the monarchy is one of the main symbols of the country.  The question is can this be compared to Brexit - can the British reverse a constitutional change that was put in place, somewhat by accident, and for which there was no consensus on what was to be done next?  It is hard to think of any political event that has had the same impact on the UK as the referendum held on June 23, 2016: it divided the country, with families and friends at odds; it created a generation gap, with the young blaming the old for robbing them of their future; it paralyzed Westminster, and came to ridicule even the image internationally in the face of MPs' inability to chart a roadmap. But nearly half of voters (45%) now believe there should be another referendum on EU membership in 2026.  No turning back?  According to the latest YouGov poll, the majority in favor of rejoining the bloc (58%) is now at its highest level since the vote. What's more, more respondents (25%) trust the European Commission than the British government (24%). According to The Independent poll, "most Britons now think the UK was wrong to leave". And, according to the BBC poll, more than a fifth of those who voted to leave the EU would now vote the other way. The truth is that, as soon as the results were known in 2016, the first demands for another consultation and the regrets of the regretful arrived.  Beyond whether or not the Brexit was a mistake, the scenario comes to confirm what critics of referendums have long argued: they solve nothing. Or at least that is what is demonstrated in the United Kingdom. The 2011 plebiscite on whether to change the simple majority electoral system (FPTP) in favor of the alternative vote (AV) resulted in a massive defeat for the reformers. However, in the years since then, large sections of the Labor Party (favored to win the 2024 election) are betting on the electoral reform policy, and lifelong opponents of FPTP were not remotely put off by the fact that just under a third of the electorate voted in favor of reform.  For its part, the 2014 independence referendum in Scotland did not resolve the sovereignty issue either. Moreover, the reason now used by the separatists to demand a new consultation is precisely that the Brexit that won in the 2016 referendum changes everything completely, because one of the arguments used at the time in the campaign to convince the Scots to remain in the UK was EU membership.  In short, referendums usually produce a result, but rarely a consensus. And yet, however ill-conceived or divisive they may be, however ephemeral their results may be, it is now hard to imagine meaningful constitutional change happening without them. It is impossible to imagine any political party following the precedent set by Ted Heath and sending the UK back into the EU in the absence of a referendum mandate, especially as such a move would now include a commitment to abolish the pound in favor of the euro. Analysts advocate that only a settled and significant majority in favor of a change should be a persuasive argument for the politicians  the rules of the game. Brexit has not brought border control, the main mantra of the Euroskeptic cause. Both legal and undocumented immigration has increased. What's more, the number of immigrants arriving by irregular routes has reached record numbers. Nor has it created economic prosperity. The International Monetary Fund predicted that the UK will be the only G7 country with negative growth in 2023. Although it did allow London to join the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), making it a key player in the Indo-Pacific.  Bregret's chances  In the UK - where there is no written constitution - there are no fixed rules about when a plebiscite must be held. They are held ad hoc, when Parliament decides. And, as long as there is a Conservative majority, it seems unthinkable that there will be a new consultation. Especially with Rishi Sunak as prime minister. The Tory leader is a pragmatic and moderate guy, who wants to improve economic relations with the single market, a man who generates more confidence than his predecessors and who has managed to unblock the problem that existed with the Irish Protocol. But he is also a more genuine Brexiteer than the previous tenants of Downing Street. Sunak's world is Silicon Valley at one end and dynamic Indo-Pacific capitalism at the other. He is even hesitant to foot the bill for the UK to rejoin the Horizon program of European scientific cooperation, despite an almost unanimous chorus of scientists on both sides of the English Channel in favor.  Therefore, if there is any possibility of holding a new plebiscite, it would only be if Labour wins the elections scheduled for next year, as all the polls predict. Although, at the moment, it is rather remote. Keir Starmer needs to win back Red Wall voters in the north of England, who abandoned Labour in 2019 for Boris Johnson and his promise to execute the European divorce.  Starmer recently published an article in the fiercely Euroskeptic conservative tabloid Daily Express in which he flatly stated that "the UK's future lies outside the EU.""Not in the single market, not in the customs union, not with a return to free movement. Those arguments are in the past, where they belong," he qualifies.  All in all, if Labour wins the next election, it will seek a better deal with the EU, as the party's foreign affairs spokesman, David Lammy, has pointed out. The review of the trade and cooperation agreement that now exists between London and Brussels is scheduled for 2025. The divorce, after all, is marked by continuous negotiation. The door could therefore be opened to a closer economic relationship.  This could include significant elements of participation in the single market and customs union, with associated regulatory harmonization. It is difficult to see how Labour can even remotely hope to achieve its hugely ambitious goal of "securing the highest sustained growth in the G7" without reducing post-Brexit friction with the EU.  In this regard, some analysts have turned their attention to the debate over Ukraine's future relationship with the EU, which is now focused on progressive integration in areas such as energy, environment, transport and the single market. They posit that the UK could have a similar reintegration.  When analyzing the decade of the 17th century in which the Crown was abolished in the UK, historians agree that one of the elements that led to its failure was the fact that, from the beginning, no one had intended to establish a republic, and it was, in a way, established by accident. Moreover, even after the execution of Charles I, there was no consensus on what was to be done. Finally, with Charles II came the Restoration and today the monarchy is one of the main symbols of the country.  Load-Date: August 26, 2023  End of Document
