   World news in brief The Independent - Daily Edition November 30, 2023 Thursday First Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Print Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: WORLD; Pg. 19 Length: 584 words Body   Kyrgyzstan president blames country's woes on its national flag Kyrgyzstan's parliament voted yesterday to change the design of the national flag after critics, including president Sadyr Japarov, said it looked like a sunflower. The flower has a similar meaning in Kyrgyz culture to a weathervane in some European languages - suggesting a fickle and servile person willing to switch allegiance for personal benefit. "There has been a widespread opinion in our society that our flag looks like a sunflower, and that is one of the reasons why the country cannot get up off its knees," President Japarov said last month. The law adopted by Kyrgyzstan's parliament in the first reading yesterday changes the design to make the sun rays straight. Reuters Pentagon sceptical about North Korea spy satellite claims North Korea has claimed its leader Kim Jong-un has reviewed "detailed pictures" taken by its first spy satellite, of the White House and military bases in a number of countries. However, North Korea has not released any pictures, leaving analysts to debate how capable the new satellite actually is. The Pentagon saidthe Malligyong-1 satellite did enter orbit, but did not comment on Pyongyang's claims about the images it had captured. "I will say that there are plenty of images of the Pentagon and the White House online," Pentagon spokesperson Brigadier General Patrick Ryder told reporters. Von der Leyen says next generation could reverse Brexit European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen said this week that young Britons could reverse Brexit. Asked if Britain could ever rejoin, she told Politico: "I keep telling my children: 'You have to fix it. We goofed it up, you have to fix it.'" And she described the Windsor Agreement on Northern Ireland as "a new beginning for old friends". A No 10 spokesperson immediately rejected the idea, saying Brexit "freedoms" were allowing the UK to diverge from Brussels on immigration, animal welfare and medicine procurement, and saying: "We are focusing on delivering Brexit, on the benefits and opportunities Brexit can bring." The world's saddest elephant dies at Manila Zoo An elephant who lived alone in a zoo in the Philippines for decades has died. Her death, at the estimated age of 43, was announced by Manila mayor Honey Lacuna in an emotional press conference. Mali had been a gift to the country's then first lady Imelda Marcos in 1988, and crowds thronged to Manila Zoo to see her. She spent her early days with another elephant, Shiva, who died in 1990. Animal charity Peta had called her "the world's saddest elephant" and over the years there had been campaigns to have her repatriated. Among those calling for her release were Paul McCartney and Morrissey. US military aircraft crashes off Japan A US military aircraft with six people on board has crashed into the sea near Japan's Yakushima island, killing one person. The Osprey crashed at 2.47pm local time yesterday, said the coastguard. The aircraft had attempted an emergency sea landing, said Japanese vice-defence minister Hiroyuki Miyazawa. Launched in 1989, the Osprey has a unique tilt-rotor design that lets it take off and land vertically, like a helicopter, before turning its rotors and achieving similar cruising speeds to a traditional turboprop plane. The aircraft are used for a wide range of mission types, including air assaults, air refuelling, evacuation and recovery and transporting VIPs. A number of crashes involving the aircraft have been reported in recent years. Load-Date: November 29, 2023  End of Document
