   £3BN LOST EVERY YEAR; 2016 referendum blunder is costing public finances huge sums, says Constitution Secretary Robertson Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 23, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 14,15 Length: 800 words Byline: CHRIS McCALL Body   BREXIT is costing Scotland a staggering £3billion each year in lost public revenues, a senior SNP minister has warned. Angus Robertson spelled out the continuing economic damage caused by the decision to leave the EU on what is the seventh anniversary of the Brexit referendum . An overwhelming majority of voters in Scotland backed remaining in Europe in the vote held on June 23, 2016. Robertson, the Constitution Secretary , said the UK leaving the European Union had limited economic growth, restricted trade, increased food costs and diminished young people's opportunities. A Scottish Government report out today finds 44 per cent of businesses blame leaving the EU as the main cause of their difficulty in trading overseas. It points to the example of shellfish exporters who now face additional estimated costs of up to £600 for each consignment due to new trade barriers. And it points to staff shortages noted by 45 per cent of tourism businesses in the Highlands and Islands, as a result of the end of freedom of movement. Scots also face more costly and difficult travel arrangements, with long transit delays at ports and airports. It comes as the Record continues its BROKEN BREXIT series which has examined the impact of leaving the EU on different parts of the Scottish economy . Robertson said: "Seven years after people in Scotland resoundingly rejected Brexit, the Scottish Governmenthas published a paper that lays clear the damage it has inflicted. LIES Ex-PM Boris Johnson "Brexit means Scotland has now left the world's biggest single market and no longer e n j o y s freedom of movement, resulting in l a b o u r shortages across the NHS, agriculture, and our hospitality sector. "Consumers and businesses continue face a cost-of-living crisis driven by rampant food inflation, while produce rots in the ground, and obstructive trade barriers that are making it harder to import and export goods from the EU. "Scotland's rural and research sectors have lost out on hundreds of millions of pounds of EU funding, which the UK Government has been unable to match. "A generation of young Scots have been deprived of life-changing exchange opportunities to study abroad." Robertson added: "The only way to meaningfully reverse this damage and restore the benefits Scotland previously enjoyed is for an independent Scotland rejoin the European Union." Labour MSP Neil Bibby said his party would "fix the mess" left by a hard Brexit but insisted independence would end up making things even worse. He said: "The SNP keep trying to drag into the arguments of the past because they have no answers to the challenges we face now. After seven years of Brexit upheaval, people and businesses in Scotland want stability, not more years of uncertainty. "Labour is committed to fixing the mess left by the Tories' hard Brexit. That starts with rebuilding shattered relationships with international friends and neighbours. "Our ambition is for Scotland and the UK to be the global leader in the green jobs of the future and by basing Great British Energy in Scotland, we'll see tens of thousands of job opportunities created for working people across the country." A UK Government spokesman insisted Brexit had already delivered significant advantages. He said: "Businesses up and down the country will now be able to reap the rewards of our status as an independent trading nation and seize new opportunities, driving economic growth, innovation and higher wages. "We have taken back control of our borders, restored domestic control over our law-making and axed numerous pieces of bureaucratic red tape, saving businesses and consumers money across the country." It comes as a poll shows more than 50 per cent of people in the UK believe leaving the EU was a mistake and the Deltapoll findings, published by the Tony Blair Institute, said 18 per cent of Leave voters think they made the wrong choice. Nearly 80 per cent of voters believe the UK should have a closer relationship with the EU in the future, with 43 per cent wanting the UK to rejoin and 13 per cent preferring a return to the single market. Younger voters aged 18 and 24 were more likely to view Brexit as a mistake. The report's authors said: "Our polling shows there is a large majority of the British public who recognise Brexit in its current form isn't working and would like to see the UK moving closer to the EU. "Any future British government that wants to improve the relationship with the EU wi ll need a c ons ide re d strategic plan - and make a clear-eyed offer. TOMORROW Record have their Brexit and it's impacted them "Asking the EU nicely cannot succeed as a strategy." BREXIT week isn't working and would like UK moving EU. British that a d TOMORROW Record readers have their say on Brexit and how it's impacted them a EU cannot strategy." Graphic    LIES Ex-PM Boris JohnsonCOUNTING THE COST SNP's RobertsonINFAMOUS The Vote Leave bus made a promise it could not keep. Pic: Jack Taylor/ Getty Images Load-Date: June 23, 2023  End of Document
