   'Brexit has been a disaster for cheese' i-news September 2, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 29 Length: 947 words Byline: Tomé Morrissy-Swan Body   In many ways the British cheese industry is in the healthiest place it's been for decades. Its farmhouse cheeses - almost wiped out after the Second World War - now come in more than 1,000 varieties. That's nearly double the amount produced by France. Events like the World Cheese Awards, at which British cheeses routinely finish in the top 10, have helped to boost their reputation abroad. The pandemic had many negative effects, but it did lead to a rise in interest in British cheese, due primarily to the uncertainty of supply from abroad. During the decade when British cheese made its gains abroad - exports to France by artisan cheesemonger Neal's Yard Dairy doubled in value between 2014 and 2021 - Britain voted to leave the EU. Since Brexit, cheese has become more expensive, rising by 13 per cent between 2019 and 2022, according to Grace Randall, retail and consumer insight manager at the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board (AHDB). Much of this was driven by inflation and the cost of living crisis, but continental cheeses have risen more steeply. Cheddar's average price rose by 11 per cent, European hard cheeses by 21 per cent. In Europe, British cheese has become harder to find and more expensive - in 2021 Marks & Spencer closed several stores in France, citing Brexit-related costs and delays. For British cheese producers and exporters, Brexit has been particularly problematic. Almost four years after leaving the EU, legislation is still being thrashed out and many small businesses have pulled out of the export market. The Cheshire Cheese Company, which produces Cheshire and cheddar, has long had a significant European market. Prior to Brexit its average ecommerce order from Europe was around £35 for 1.5kg of cheese including delivery. Founder and managing director Simon Spurrell says Brexit added an extra £180 in export costs for each order, no matter the size. In the summer of 2021 an average wholesale shipment of 2.5 tons rose from £400 to £1,200. Mr Spurrell (inset) said he lost many of his European trade customers and a £250,000 loss was forecast. Mr Spurrell, also commercial director at Derbyshire's Stiltonproducing Hartington Creamery, believes Brexit has been disastrous for cheese exports. "Cheshire Cheese was particularly affected, with deals with non-EU countries shockingly bad," he says. Exports at Hartington Creamery, which makes Stilton from a herd of 200 cows, have been almost entirely wiped out. In fact, Mr Spurrell claims, only the small cheese firms that group together shipments are still exporting to Europe. Better to go through an exporter such as Neal's Yard Dairy, though their prices have also gone up. "Before, we could pack the cheese on the Thursday and it would be in France with the customer on the Monday," says its director, Sarah Stewart. Added paperwork and costs associated with processing it mean the deliveries now take a week. "It's increased the costs significantly," adds Ms Stewart. Brexit has also heavily affected imports from Europe. Hugo Meyer Esquerré, founder of Provisions, a deli with two sites in London specialising in French and Italian cheeses, agrees. "The intention when being sold Brexit was getting rid of red tape, but it's been the contrary for us," he says. Several layers of administrative paperwork, as well as the labour needed to process it, are costing the company an additional £15,000 to £20,000 per month. "It's pure loss for the business, so our prices had to increase to make the business viable. Ultimately, myself and all consumers in the UK are affected." Earlier this month, the Financial Times reported that post-Brexit checks on fresh food arriving into the UK from the EU had been delayed again (tests are already imposed on fresh British produce going the other way). Though some British producers argue the tests would end an unfair advantage, Meyer Esquerré says it could make some of our beloved French and Italian cheeses pricier. "I wouldn't call it the end of an era of importing from small-scale suppliers, but it would make it very tricky for producers we work with that are not geared for laboratory testing." (The Labour Party says it will look into a veterinary agreement with the EU that would realign British food standards with the EU and ease the "mountain of red tape" involved in importing and exporting animal products). The Government insists Brexit has not been a failure, but many involved in the cheese industry disagree. "I couldn't put my finger on a Brexit positive dividend," says Ms Stewart. Mr Spurrell echoes this: "It's reduced our market, reduced our horizons and increased our costs. There's been absolutely no benefit." Sharp ideas Five British cheeses to try Lincolnshire Poacher Made on a small family farm using raw milk and traditional practices, Lincolnshire Poacher (inset) is reminiscent of West Country cheddar and French alpine cheeses, with a smooth, creamy texture. Kirkham's Lancashire A once ubiquitous cheese, this is the last remaining farmhouse Lancashire made with unpasteurised milk. Both crumbly and creamy, it has a butteriness as well as a bright tang. Corra Linn This Scottish sheep's cheese is nutty and brothy, an incredibly complex cheese not dissimilar to manchego. Westcombe Dairy ricotta Home of the famous Westcombe cheddar, the farm's ricotta, made from leftover whey, is stellar. A soft crumbly texture, it's sweet and salty. Stichelton Stilton fans will love this alternative, made to a Stilton recipe in Nottinghamshire, but with unpasteurised milk. It's fruity, buttery, sharp and salty, perfect for Christmas cheese boards. We were sold Brexit on the intention to get rid of red tape, but it's been the contrary Load-Date: September 2, 2023  End of Document
