   'I kept thinking, "The next minister can't be any worse." How wrong I was'; Minette Batters, the first female president of the NFU, has steered the country's farmers through Brexit, the pandemic and the impact of the war in Ukraine. Now she's stepping down, but not before taking aim at the politicians she believes have damaged farming - and destroyed livesBy Alice Thomson The Times (London) February 24, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: MAGAZINE;FEATURES; Pg. 44,45,46,47 Length: 2221 words Byline: Alice Thomson Body   It was all about the stilettos ten years ago when Minette Batters became the first female deputy president of the National Farmers' Union. Could a petite blonde farmer drive a tractor in heels? Had she ever stuck her hand up a sheep, with a manicure? The 47,000 members were getting their baler twine in a twist. Yet Batters seemed unfazed when I first met her in 2014, casually reversing a livestock box at her Wiltshire farm in her mud-splattered overalls. "My father had doubts a woman could farm. I wanted to prove him wrong," she said. She laughs now as we sit by her Aga in the kitchen, "a decade older and wiser", she says. How could she have known that she would face first Brexit, then a pandemic, Russia invading Ukraine, avian flu, inflation-soaring fuel, fertiliser and feed prices, empty supermarket shelves, one billion fewer eggs, labour shortages, apples rotting on the trees and a cabinet minister saying, "Let them eat turnips"? Since she was elected deputy and then president of the NFU, she has worked with five prime ministers and seven secretaries of state at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. "I kept thinking the next minister can't be any worse," she says. "How wrong I was." She still has to get up at 5.30am to check on her sheep and cows each day before heading off to the NFU offices in London or Warwickshire. At weekends, the single mother of teenage twins works feeding her livestock, hosting weddings and mucking out horses, then trains for marathons, but there is always soup and a lemon drizzle cake in the former caterer's fridge. She admits she is exhausted. "Shattered, actually. I had no idea the job would be so all-consuming. I thought I might do the odd trip to Brussels. Now it almost gives me panic attacks looking back: pigs being slaughtered on farms, dairy farmers tipping their milk down the drain in lockdown, growers for garden centres binning produce. I remember wondering whether it was sensationalist to mention that Russia might invade Ukraine at our annual speech two years ago. In the end, I did and the next day it happened." She still wakes up in the night terrified that "the whole country is starving and they're sitting in Downing Street talking At 56, she is stepping down, having done as much as she feels she can. The government has appeared at times to view farmers as antiquated, whingeing and even redundant. SPREAD: While the reputation of politicians has plummeted since 2014, trust in farmers has soared and they are now rated nearly as highly as nurses. Batters has somehow found the time to become friends with everyone from King Charles to Jamie PREVIOUS Oliver, the inventor James Dyson and the shepherd James Rebanks. Jeremy Clarkson rings her for advice on his clover; even Sir Keir Starmer has visited her farm. "He came in a bomber jacket and black T-shirt," she says. "I thought he was the delivery man, but his wellies were well worn. He's more country than you think." Boris Johnson, however, has not been forgiven. Three years ago, Batters told me that Johnson, as prime minister, had promised her when she met him that he would rather die than hurt British farmers. He had a tear in his eye. "That was bullshit," she says. "His last words to me before he left Downing Street were, 'I'm sorry about the build back beaver speech [a pro-conservation address to Cop26].' Well, so are the farmers. He couldn't take anything seriously." Batters runs through the secretaries of state. ThérÈse Coffey must be the worst, I suggest. She was singing karaoke while farms flooded and turkeys were catching avian flu. "Ranil [Jayawardena] was even worse," she says. "Remember him? He lasted 49 days." Liz Truss was "truly awful. I assumed they would all be cleverer than me, but I couldn't believe how bad some politicians are. Kwasi Kwarteng told me that he couldn't be a free marketeer one day and ban Morrisons from being taken over by the Americans with their chlorine chicken the next. It was all or nothing. So I asked him, 'What would you do if a billionaire wanted to buy Stonehenge?' He couldn't answer." Meanwhile, Jeremy Hunt told her, "You'll have to excuse me, I don't know much about agriculture." She patiently explained to him, "But you eat food." Some civil servants have been equally unhelpful. "I remember bursting into tears on a Teams call when a senior civil servant didn't seem to care whether upland farmers had a future or not." Batters rarely complained publicly. While farmers on the continent have gone on the rampage, barricading Paris, spreading muck in Berlin and causing havoc from Greece to the Netherlands, her members have continued to milk their cows despite becoming increasingly desperate about making ends meet. "French farmers are good at rioting," she says. "We are slightly more reserved." Now she is standing down she can be more blunt. "We should be leading the way post-Brexit and farmers can show how we can deliver for nature and net zero by 2040, but politicians seem to have forgotten that we can't just focus on the environment," she says. "We also need to produce food. It's astonishing that there is no mention of growing fruit or vegetables in our new farm subsidies. The government just don't seem to care about food security and it panics me." Her fear is that food producers could give up and take their land out of production if they are treated as pariahs, rather than providers, or are forced to become glorified wild gardeners, and only a few megafarms will survive. "We are grubbing up hundreds of orchards. Growers have no certainty on who will pick apples any more. If you want to put up a solar farm, you'll be paid for the next 25 years. It's a no-brainer. If you produce field vegetables, salads or fruit for the nation, you will spend your time in endless negotiations with ruthless supermarket buyers beating you down to the lowest common denominator." The British spend less than any other European country on their groceries and throw away more. "Our supermarkets dominate here and we have got addicted to very cheap food, but it's not ethical and consumers lose out as they increasingly have less choice and poorer-quality imported goods." Batters worries that UK food production, which now provides less than 60 per cent of our sustenance, could soon plummet below 50 per cent. "It took two world wars, a starving Europe and rationing for us to realise the importance of growing our own food, and a pandemic to remind us. It wasn't just loo roll that was running out four years ago. In an increasingly unstable, post-pandemic world, it's obvious we need to be able to feed ourselves in case of global meltdown." But, she says, if you are a wheat farmer you could now lose £450 a hectare, whereas if you sign up to the Sustainable Farming Incentive, a programme of grants for environmental actions, you could be paid £854 a hectare to plant wildflowers. Batters wants the government to incentivise farmers not just to set aside money for creating meadows, planting trees, maintaining hedges and reducing flooding, but for producing food. "When I first became president, there was talk of lab-grown meat and vertical farms, but I always thought that was for the birds. We already know that ultra-processed food is bad for us. What we need is fresh British produce cooked from scratch." As president, she has campaigned for all her members, from the vast estates with their regenerative farming projects to the upland tenant farmers struggling with a few sheep. "Almost all want to leave their land in a better state," she says, but they have different priorities. Beavers have gnawed at her tenure. "The right beaver in the right place can do a great job, so I am not against their reintroduction. But in the wrong place their dams can cause chaos and flood communities." She is more sceptical about lynx and wolves. "Bringing back wolves on an island with 68 million people would end badly. A hungry wolf will delight in eating someone's pet dog and a wolf will be in Birmingham before you know it." Batters does, however, like the idea of bringing back more turtle doves, snipe, lapwing and insects - "species that have plummeted". Britain, she thinks could become a Garden of Eden. "I voted against Brexit, but there are possibilities in going it alone," she says. "We have the best scientific research centres in the world. But once we've stopped producing, we will really struggle to start again and we'll regret it for ever. Do we want a safari park or a thriving rural economy?" After 14 years, it is unlikely the Tories will change course. Has she convinced Labour to reassure farmers and revitalise farming? "They don't appear to have a policy yet, but they need to. They could inherit food shortages and empty supermarket shelves. Only four years ago, during the pandemic, ministers were promising me anything if farmers would keep food production going. You're only four meals away from anarchy." With her own herd of cows and flock of sheep, she must also worry about the rise in veganism. "This country should be producing more vegetables, fruit and pulses. We could grow almost all our tomatoes and salad instead of importing them from Spain and Morocco." Has there been no one among the Tory party who has been supportive? "Michael Gove was impressive," she says. "He did listen and he could grasp a brief, but then he would do what he wanted. Truss never did any detail. She was just obsessed with Instagram." And cocktails and cheese. "The churn and change since then has been horrendous. George Eustice quickly realised that any Brexit deal would sacrifice the farmers, so felt conflicted. Thér?se Coffey harmed herself and everyone else with her 'let them eat turnips'." The trade negotiations post-Brexit are ongoing. "We allowed Australia and New Zealand to walk all over us," says Batters. "I don't think they could believe their luck. With India, we still don't know what will happen." How is her relationship with Rishi Sunak? He loves being seen helping with the milking in his Yorkshire constituency. "He did host the first food summit at Downing Street, but there is still no target for producing our own food." Were there times when she wished she had not taken on the job? "I did worry I wasn't a stay-at-home mother putting tea on the table, as my mother did on the farm," she says. "I always feel an element of failure, but my children kindly say I would have driven them berserk. One of their proudest moments was when they found out that Jeremy Clarkson follows me on social media." She always wanted to be a farmer. "But I had no idea what the NFU was when I was young. I hated public speaking. My dad would have been amazed. I remember when I finally took over the tenant farm and business and went through the accounts, I said, 'What's this?' He said, 'It's the NFU subscription. It's worth paying in case you have a crisis.' " Batters is the fifth generation of her family to farm. "I grew up here and I never went on holiday once," she says. "We used to go to the Royal Show because dad was a steward. I never thought that was odd until my schoolfriends said it was weird. I had so much responsibility. I did all the calf rearing before I went to school, bedding them up, giving them their milk, making sure they had water, and doing the same after school. I loved looking after them. I am still on call 24/7, but it's my choice. It is impossible to put into words the affinity you have with the land and a suckler herd. You know their genetics. They go back to my father's herd." Like her grandparents, she can see the spire of Salisbury Cathedral across her fields. "We owned land once. Now we're tenants, but the date stone on the cottage says 1680 and I like to think of the farmers here stretching back generations. I hope my children might do it one day." There have been moments when she wondered what she was doing. "But I've got to know Ukrainian farmers," she says. "The impact [of the war] has been huge for us, but so much worse for them. Cows have been burnt alive, fields have been mined, yet they are still planting and harvesting. It makes me feel grateful." Her lowest moments, she says, have been hearing stories of men and women in farming taking their own lives. "As a farmer, your office is outside, so you are at the mercy of the weather and it's relentless if you have livestock or crops. Now there's been the added unpredictability of all these government decisions. It can become a huge pressure when you are isolated and lonely." What is she going to do now she is stepping down? "I'm going to grow British flowers and I'll still have my cows and my weddings. I am going to have to reinvent myself, maybe write a book, run another marathon. I couldn't go on a supermarket board or become an MP, but I'm always happy to give advice." Her father would have been stunned by how easily she appears to have moved from mucking out to macro-economics. Starmer could put her in the Lords, but he'd have to drag Cincinnatus back from the land. "I want people to think, 'She was a woman, but she did as good a job as a man,' " says Batters. "I'd hate farmers to go, 'Don't you remember the terrible time we had a woman in charge?' " And with that she is off to check on the sheep. n 'Boris Johnson couldn't take anything seriously. Liz Truss was awful' Graphic    In Yorkshire with Liz TrussMinette Batters, 56, photographed on her farm in Wiltshire by Tom JacksonIn Oxfordshire with Michael Gove, environment secretary, 2018Rishi Sunak at the NFU during the 2022 Tory leadership election Load-Date: February 24, 2024  End of Document
