   'There is still work to do, but the industry is changing'; As International Women's Day approaches, Margaret Canning looks at why logistics and transport is no longer a boys' club... Business Telegraph March 5, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland) All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2,3 Length: 968 words Byline: Margaret Canning Body   THE working lives and career choices of women have changed beyond compare in the past 50 years, and we rightly want to see women represented at all levels in every industry. Yet there are still areas which wouldn't be typically expected to draw women in large numbers - and logistics is one of them. As International Women's Day takes place on Friday, two leading women in the industry - Nichola Mallon, ex-SDLP infrastructure minister and now head of trade and devolved policy at trade body Logistics UK, and Sarah Hards, sales director at AM Logistics in Larne - say it has much to recommend to women. Both Nichola and Sarah came to their roles after careers in other industries, with Sarah first working as a criminal lawyer. AM Logistics employs around 100 people, with an even split between drivers and office staff. Around five of its drivers are women, which Sarah says is low, while around half of its staff in other sections are female. Ms Mallon, the former infrastructure minister, says: "Logistics and transport is an exciting, challenging and highly rewarding industry to work in. "It is built for those with excellent multi-tasking, management and problem-solving skills, and it is fantastic, particularly over recent years, to see more and more women choosing logistics as a career and thriving in it across different roles, from warehouse operatives to inventory control managers to transport managers and directors." She said women in the industry in Northern Ireland were supporting one another. "A lot of heavy lifting has been done over many years by women paving the way for other women to have successful careers in the industry. There is undoubtedly still a lot of work to do, but the industry is changing. This change is reflected in Logistics UK's Freight Council, which has two inspiring women, Marie-Claire Reid, managing director of TST in Ballymena, and Lynda Gregg, transport and contracts manager at Antrim and Newtownabbey Borough Council, at the helm. "All of the evidence shows that a diverse and inclusive workforce is a stronger workforce." Sarah Hards joined AM Logistics, which was founded by her father Damian, uncle Alex and mother Irene, in 2015. She had qualified as a solicitor in England, going on to work as an associate at a criminal law firm in London. She met her husband Tom while they both worked in law, with him now also working in the family company as finance director. Sarah says she brought a new professionalism to the business when she joined - an evolution which has been seen across the industry. "We've always had great clients, servicing retail contracts here and in the Republic. We look after retailers like Home Bargains, Screwfix, Superdrug, Poundland and kitchens company Howdens. "When I joined, we had these great customers but no contracts in place, which really mystified me. In any work we'd ever done in London, contracts were the first thing we talked about. So it was quite good to have those transferable skills from law." There has been great change in the industry in the past 15 years or so, and Sarah thinks more is to come. "It was seen as an industry that was a little bit on the messy side. If you were a haulier, you were expected to have lorries but maybe have just one person in your office. "But we now have big teams in sales, finance, customer service, planning and operations. "I think now our industry is becoming more attractive to women because there is an array of roles. "The industry is changing and the world is changing, so there are so many new opportunities coming up in transport and logistics "We're going to have to become green and use different fuels and electric vehicles, so it's going to be a whole new landscape again. "There's going to be new skills required which nobody has at the minute, so it's going to be really interesting to see what happens in the next 10 to 15 years. "It's a lot more scientific, so I'm hoping that will open this world up to a whole new generation of young people, both men and women. It's become much more professional now and there's so much more going on." Logistics has been buffeted around by factors such as the pandemic, Brexit, supply chain challenges and recruitment shortages, all of which Sarah says require a sense of wider context. "In all honesty, women are really good at that - stepping back and looking at the bigger picture." She cautions that the Windsor Framework and agreement this year between the UK and DUP to restore the Executive haven't gotten rid of the problems which have affected NI since Brexit. "It was a real state of flux for a couple of years and it still remains that way. There has been the Windsor Framework - and changes to that as well in the most recent Command Paper. "We haven't had clear guidance on how we would implement day-to-day operations and how it will really affect us moving goods from GB to NI." She has advised government and spoken in the House of Lords about Brexit. "It's been an interesting time and it's been good to flex my mental muscle when it comes to looking at Brexit legislation, reading it and putting it into practice. "Nichola and I are always on the phone to each other, sharing our knowledge and information; I think women are much better at sharing information and being open and saying: 'How are we going to work this for the best?' "We don't want to keep how we import goods a secret, we want everyone to be able to benefit from this. "I travelled over to the House of Lords to advise them on Brexit and how it affects business. I would never have thought that I would be capable of that or that that would ever happen in my life. It's quite nice. Maybe I didn't continue down that traditional route that my degree was leading me to, but I've made a really good success of this." 'There is greater appeal due to an array of roles' Graphic    Career pivot: Sarah Hards of AM LogisticsEvolving workplace: More women are choosing logistics as a career; (below) Nichola Mallon, who now works for haulage company Logistics UK Load-Date: March 5, 2024  End of Document
