   "WHEN the facts change[...]; COMMENT The Express November 6, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 5 Length: 569 words Byline: CATHERINE McBRIDE Body   "WHEN the facts change, I change my mind," economist John Maynard Keynes famously quipped, "What do you do, Sir?" We have heard stories for many years about the apocalyptic impact of the British people's vote to leave the EU. A particularly prominent example comes from the Office for Budget Responsibility, which stands by its claim that Brexit would result in around a 15% drop in exports and imports, contributing to a 4% smaller economy in the long run. As Brexit could only possibly alter trade with the EU, which makes up just 42% of total UK trade, then for total UK trade to fall by 15% the OBR must still expect UK trade with the EU to fall by 36%. As I discuss in a new paper out today, the real-world trade data between the UK and the EU since Brexit shows no such signs of decline. 'about UK's with post-based For example, UK goods exports rose by 13.5% to EU countries and 14.3% to non-EU countries between 2019 and 2022, before and after Brexit. If Brexit were having an impact, we would expect to see some sort of divergence, with EU trade doing worse than non-EU. But we are not. The facts have changed. That's not to say there have been no changes toUK trade flows in recent years. There was a massive fall in trade with all countries during Covid and a massive increase in oil and gas imports from non-EU countries since Russia invaded Ukraine. Brexit caused neither. For most industries, UK trade with EU and non-EU countries has been very similar. Intriguingly, the OBR said just last week that trade is contributing more to GDP growth due to "strongerthan-expected export growth". Yet it would appear that the OBR has never reviewed or revised its assumption about a 15% fall in trade volumes. Of the 12 studies it cites to back up the claim, analysing data from 2016 to 2019, none could have known the exact nature of the post-Brexit UK-EU Trade and Co-operation Agreement (TCA). The TCA differs from typical EU trade agreements by offering immediate tariff-free and quota-free market access. Contrary to external studies' assumptions, non-tariff trade friction hasn't been evident in UK-EU trade data. This is because the UK's major exporters, like Rolls-Royce and Unilever, are well-versed in global trade compliance, making additional EU paperwork negligible. Meanwhile, the Channel Tunnel, responsible for a quarter of UK trade, announced in July this year that its border pass technology allows trade to clear customs and cross the Channel at the same speed as before Brexit. Pessimism the The OBR's external studies also couldn't trade the EU Brexit is on poor anticipate the impact of the TCA's rules of origin on UK-EU trade. When the UK was a member of the bloc, many goods that were largely manufactured in Asia and Africa were counted as if they came from the EU. Under the post-Brexit rules, they must be counted from their true origin. This changes the trade statistics without actually changing the trade. The OBR, missing that accounting rules have changed, has incorrectly asserted that UK trade has shifted from the EU to Asian countries due to Brexit. The OBR's pessimistic assumptions about UK trade with the EU are based on a series of false assumptions and poor analysis. Even worse, the realworld data is proving them entirely wrong. It's about time the OBR heeds Keynes's advice and updates its views on Brexit. 'Pessimism about the UK's trade with the EU post-Brexit is based on poor analysis' Load-Date: November 6, 2023  End of Document
