   A fresh view on botched Brexit; Businesses screwed, useless politicians... even Nigel Farage thinks our break from the EU has failed. But how can we fix it? The Sunday Times (London) September 3, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: CULTURE;FEATURES; Pg. 22,23 Length: 965 words Byline: Dominic Sandbrook Body   What Went Wrong with Brexit And What We Can Do About It by Peter Foster Canongate £14.99 pp192 It was four o'clock in the morning of Friday, June 24, 2016, and Nigel Farage had reached the promised land. "Dare to dream," he told his supporters, "that the dawn is breaking on an independent United Kingdom... This will be a victory for real people, a victory for ordinary people, a victory for decent people... Let June 23 go down in our history as our Independence Day." Seven years on, how does Farage's victory look? Well, you don't have to be an unreconciled Remainer to know that Brexit hasn't quite gone to plan. One poll this summer found that 31 per cent of the public think that it was right to leave the EU. Another found that only 18 per cent of Leave voters think Brexit has gone well. And Farage himself? "We've mismanaged this totally," he told the BBC. "Brexit has failed." Peter Foster, formerly the Europe editor for the Daily Telegraph (even then a Brexit sceptic on a pro-Brexit paper), agrees that something has gone badly wrong. But his short book is a lot better than the usual Remainer polemics. It's telling, for example, that he begins not with a paean to continental brotherhood, but with a chapter entitled F*** Business, a quotation from one Boris Johnson. Coolly, meticulously, Foster builds his case that business has been well and truly f***ed. He tells the story of Hampstead Tea, founded in 1989 to import high-grade Darjeeling from India. By 2016 its founder, Kiran Tawadey, was selling 100,000kg of tea a year to customers including supermarkets in Italy, France and Germany. Brexit wiped out her export trade overnight. "Her first consignment to Italy," Foster writes, "was stuck in customs for eight weeks before it was cleared." The Italians needed certificates and photographs for every shipment. When she went to a trade show in Germany, clients turned away once they heard that she was based in Britain. In the end, Foster writes, "she took the advice of the HM Customs and Excise experts and shifted her business to the Netherlands". That says it all. What puzzles Foster is why so many businesses chose to "stay out of the political fray", creating a "climate of silence" during the Brexit negotiations. The answer, of course, is that they feared being denounced as antidemocratic "doomsters". So they abandoned the field to Britain's politicians - who, in Foster's view, could scarcely have done a worse job. With cold fury he lists the broken promises, the wild oversimplifications, the refusal to admit that a clean break would involve costs as well as benefits. He reserves particular scorn for those who denied there were downsides to Brexit, only to change their tune when it became personally convenient. Life outside the single market, the head of the Scotch Whisky Association predicted in 2016, would be "more complex, burdensome and uncertain" - a sentiment of which the Brexit negotiator Lord Frost would surely disapprove, had he not been the man who said it. And who's this ardent Remainer? "This is why that EU market is so precious; because we share the same regulations, we share the same rules over things like food safety, over animal health and welfare." Why, none other than Liz Truss - the same Liz Truss, Foster drily remarks, who later vowed to tear up 2,400 EU regulations in 15 months. The only thing that saved her from breaking her promise is that she didn't last long enough to do so. Although I agree with almost every word of Foster's book, I became steadily more conscious of what was missing. It's revealing that it carries endorsements from Emily Maitlis, James O'Brien and Will Hutton - precisely the kind of people most likely to repel the readers he needs to persuade. His title implies that there was an alternative path on which Brexit could have gone right, but he never really says what it was. Nor does he pause to address the deeper causes, from the genuine anxiety about national sovereignty to the instinctive Euroscepticism of large swathes of the public. For all its merits, therefore, Foster's book reminds me of a Remain campaign pamphlet from 2016: at once intellectually plausible and emotionally unsatisfying. He is very good at showing how Britain's politicians consistently underplayed the inevitable trade-offs of leaving the EU, and he's excellent on why things such as VAT rules matter to small businesses. But Remainers were making these arguments in 2016 and millions of voters simply shrugged. VAT may be important, but it's boring. A skilful politician recognises both parts of that equation and crafts their message accordingly. In his second half, What to Do About It, Foster describes a private cross-party summit at Ditchley Park, Oxfordshire, in early 2023, where senior politicians discussed how Brexit might work better. As he laments, reports of this meeting provoked wild accusations of betrayal from Farage and other Brexiteers. But the answer is surely to devise a stirring counternarrative that will persuade former Leave voters - and relative agnostics like me - rather than telling Maitlis and O'Brien what they already think. In his closing pages Foster suggests that it's time for a "national debate on the future of EU-UK relations", laying the foundations for a "new settlement" and recognising the need for realignment with our neighbours. But the nature of a national debate is that people are bound to argue back. And the lesson of 2016 is that to win that argument, the Foster camp will need more than carefully compiled facts about VAT schemes; they need to appeal to hearts as well as minds. What they need, in other words, is their own Nigel Farage. c Buy from www.timesbookshop.co.uk or call 020 3176 2935. Discount for Times+ members This is better than the usual Remainer polemics Graphic    Celebration Farage with his supporters after the 2016 vote Load-Date: September 3, 2023  End of Document
