   Act of collective national self-harm - that's Brexit; LETTER S Get in touch - tell us what you think Email: yoursay@plymouthherald.co.uk The Plymouth Herald December 21, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: FEATURES; LETTERS; Pg. 14 Length: 306 words Body   JEREMY Comerford (Letters, December 20) wants us all to believe that Brexit hasn't failed, even though post-Brexit migration numbers are through the roof. I beg to differ. We now have migration figures for the first two years following the UK's exit from the European Union: 2021 and 2022. It is ironic in the extreme that in those two years the UK experienced the largest influx of people into the UK than ever before in our nation's history. In 2021, net immigration was 466,000 people. Last year, in 2022, migration added just shy of three-quarters of a million people (745,000) to the UK population. In 2019, the last full year the UK was an EU member before the pandemic severely limited international migration, the figure was 184,000. Brexit is a full-spectrum, 360-degree abject failure; an act of collective national self-harm. It has made doing business with the massive EU marketplace on our doorstep harder, slower and more complicated, hurting our economy and pushing up prices. It has ended the right that Brits used to have, as EU citizens, to live, work, study and retire across pretty much an entire continent, making the British passport a much less powerful document than it used to be. But the fact that, since Brexit happened, net migration into the UK has sky-rocketed is Exhibit A in the damning indictment against Brexit. With an ageing population and a falling birth rate, we need people from overseas to keep our economy going and our public services staffed, so I have no problem with immigration. But slashing numbers was the big selling point that many campaigning for Leave used to sell the idea to the British public, and it hasn't even done that - quite the opposite. Brexit has failed to achieve anything, and has come at a massive cost. That is why most now want to rejoin and why, eventually, we will. Stuart Bonar Load-Date: December 21, 2023  End of Document
