   Any Other Business Sunday Independent March 17, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS;NEWS; Pg. 16 Length: 1329 words Byline: John Burns Body   Everseen bags a Purple Heart for board hire in Cork AI op While Irish artists boycotted the South by Southwest (SXSW) music festival in Texas because it's sponsored by the US Army, a company in Cork has no qualms about linking up with the top brass. Everseen, founded in 2008 by Alan O'Herlihy, has developed AI-powered technology for the retail sector, to help it with management of inventory and monitoring self-service checkouts. Recently joining its board, we note, is one James Craig Nixon, a consultant based in Biloxi. He's also a retired brigadier, with an online bio describing him as a "combat-decorated, special operations soldier" who has been awarded both a Silver Star and Purple Heart. In Iraq, Nixon was the Deputy Commanding General of the 25th Infantry Division, and he has "participated in a number of contingency and combat operations including the invasion of Panama". After retiring from the US army in 2011, he joined the Mc- Chrystal Group, a consultancy. Something of a catch, then, for a Cork company, but we couldn't find any reference to Nixon on its website, let alone an announcement. Approached for a comment, an Everseen spokesman said: "We have nothing to add at this time." Dumbest f***ing remark in history Michael O'Leary is a dab hand at winding up the Tory press in Britain. Last April, the Ryanair chief executive had them spluttering when he claimed Brexiteers would soon die out, and a "much more pro-European" younger generation would lead the UK back into the EU. Monocles popped out all over the Home Counties again last weekend when O'Leary told The Sunday Times that Brexit was "the dumbest f***ing idea in history delivered by the dumbest politicians in history", and repeated his prediction that when the over 70s who voted for Brexit die out in the next decade or so - "which is a good thing" - the younger folk would change things back to the way they were. "Fury as Ryanair chief says he wants pensioners who voted for Brexit 'to die'," headlined an empurpled GB News. One critic was Michael Portillo, who admitted he'd flown Ryanair the previous day. "Brexit was not about the convenience of Ryanair, or even about air passengers," the former Tory minister pointed out. "I'm afraid that while Michael O'Leary absolutely knows how to run an airline, he doesn't know very much about accountability in politics." He may not know much about political demographics either. Because while it's true older people were more inclined to vote for Brexit, and that they are passing on, it's also true that as people get older, they become more conservative in their views on issues such as immigration. So the old folk who voted for Brexit in 2016 will eventually be replaced by more old folk, who will feel exactly the same. Red-faces over blank face at CB You've heard the expression "faceless official" as a metaphor for unaccountable government bureaucracy. But the Central Bank does actually have a faceless official, according to a recent 90-page judgment from the Irish Financial Services Appeals Tribunal. It was examining the case of a man who the Central Bank felt was an unfit person to be a di- rector. The tribunal noted that, throughout a video interview with the man conducted by the Central Bank in 2021, the screen of one official asking the questions was blank. "The interview went on for two hours on WebEx," the judgment says. "On the screen the appellant could see two officials. But he could not see Official X, a supervisor in the Fund Supervision Division, Securities & Markets Directorate. Official X's screen remained blank. This was never explained." The person being interviewed "found this an uncomfortable experience". The judgment, first reported in the Irish Independent, has been getting some international attention, due to a follow-up piece in the Financial Times. When we went looking for it online last week, however, it had disappeared. The registrar of the tribunal told us it had been removed "due to technical issues, but will be reinstated on our website shortly". Apparently they're going to edit out a passing reference to an uninvolved third party. Which shouldn't take long. We'll watch to see if the Lanigan's Ball judgment steps back in again soon. The 2024 Wall Street gate crash Last Monday was the 12th annual Ireland Day at the New York Stock Exchange, with the opening bell rung vigorously by publisher Ian Hyland, president of Ireland INC. He was flanked by Justice Minister Helen McEntee, Claire Cronin, the US ambassador to Ireland, Michael Lohan, CEO of the IDA, Joe Kennedy III, special envoy to Northern Ireland for economic affairs, and other worthies. In a way it's appropriate so many Irish representatives crossed the Atlantic to Wall Street, since this is what several Irish companies have done too. Flutter, CRH and Diageo have delisted from Dublin, and Smurfit Kappa is about to join them. Euronext Dublin is desperately trying to revive the Irish exchange, but Finance Minister Michael McGrath has said "more work" has to be done on its proposals. How about some celebrity 'opening bell' ceremonies? Or maybe not. Just like last year, at the end of trading after Ireland Day, the S&P and Nasdaq had both slipped. An Epic ending to D1 planning saga The Epic museum in Dublin's docklands, which covers the history of emigration and the Irish diaspora, will be a busy hub this weekend. On their way in, visitors will pass a free-standing 3D sign saying 'Epic' which is over two-metres tall. Although there since 2018, it has only just been given permanent planning permission. Five years ago, Dublin City Council's planners granted only temporary permission, in order to assess its "acceptability". There were concerns it "could impede the circulation of pedestrians" and "could also establish an undesirable precedent". Having now satisfied themselves that there are "no issues with regards to pedestrian circulation", it's got the OK. The end of an Epic saga, you might say. Reputation lives up to its name What is the main ingredient in laverbread? Who is older - Leo Varadkar or Rishi Sunak? And when did Clare last win the Munster Hurling final? These were among the questions put by RTÉ's Bryan Dobson to a packed GPO on Wednesday night for the 21st Corporate Challenge Quiz, organised by the Business Journalists Association of Ireland. Just over (EURO)42,000 was raised for the Dublin Simon Community, in an event sponsored by An Post. Despite being encumbered by yours truly, second place in the quiz went to Wilson Hartnell. The winners, by two clear points, were Reputation Inc, with a team comprising Cormac Bradley, Martyn Rosney, Susannah Kerr and Robert Brown, assisted by journalist Olivia Fletcher from Bloomberg. The answers to those questions? Seaweed, Leo and 1998. Alarm raised by CCPC probe The competition authority usually doesn't identify what companies it visits. Last week, for example, the CCPC merely said it had carried out an unannounced inspection at the premises of a business active in the passenger aviation sector. We probably would have worked out what airline was involved, but Ryanair removed all doubt by releasing a statement confirming it was them. The other recent inspections were on "businesses in the home alarm industry", as part of an investigation into potential breaches of competition law. The dominant player in this industry is Phonewatch, with about 100,000 domestic and business customers. We contacted a spokeswoman and told her it was our understanding Phonewatch was among the companies visited by the regulator, and could it comment on this, and if it's co-operating with the CCPC probe. "We are aware of the recent press release from the CCPC which outlines their intention to conduct an investigation into the home security industry," she replied. PhoneWatch takes our obligations under Competition Law very seriously, and as such we will give our full cooperation to any proposed process." OFFICIAL X'S SCREEN STAYED BLANK. THIS WAS NEVER EXPLAINED Graphic    Craig Nixon was a deputy general during the Iraq warQuiz winners Samantha Kerr and Olivia Fletcher and, from top, Ryanair's Michael O'Leary, Helen McEntee with Ian Hyland, and the Epic museum in Dublin Load-Date: March 18, 2024  End of Document
