   As elections loom, Sunak can only envy America’s economic growth thetimes.co.uk February 27, 2024 Tuesday 3:20 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 929 words Byline: David Smith Highlight: The performance of the US under President Biden is streets ahead of that of the post-Brexit UK Body   Both Britain and America face important elections this year, and for their leaders, the challenge is similar. How can they turn what they expect to be an improving economic performance into votes and avoid defeat? The similarities, perhaps, should not be overstated. America’s economic performance under President Biden is streets ahead of that of the UK under Rishi Sunak and his recent predecessors. While US real gross domestic product is 8.2 per cent up on pre-pandemic levels, the UK is up by only 1 per cent. There are special factors. The UK was harder hit by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, because of high gas dependency, and suffered from serious leadership problems under two prime ministers before this one. Combining formal Brexit with the challenges thrown up by the pandemic made a bad economic decision into an even worse one. America under Biden has pursued what the US Treasury calls a pro-growth climate policy under the Inflation Reduction Act and is comfortably the best performer in the G7 compared with pre-pandemic levels. Even so, something more fundamental has changed. America has not always outperformed the UK in a meaningful way. If we take the recovery period from 2009 and the global financial crisis to the second quarter of 2016, when Britain’s Brexit referendum was held, the UK grew by a cumulative 14.7 per cent, despite coalition austerity. America was ahead, with 16.7 per cent, but not by much. It is since then that the gap has opened up. Cumulative UK growth since the second quarter of 2016 is 7.6 per cent. America’s is an astonishing 18.9 per cent. Those who doubt that the UK could not have grown by another 5 per cent were it not for the Brexit vote and Brexit itself should think about those figures. America has outgrown the EU and the eurozone, as is usually the case. Britain has fallen significantly behind all three and the UK’s per capita GDP is lower than at the start of this parliament. From the early 1990s (1993) to 2015, the UK’s average annual GDP growth — despite a sharp productivity slowdown after the financial crisis — averaged 2.2 per cent, within sight of America’s 2.6 per cent. For those of us on this side of the Atlantic, the puzzle is that America’s economic performance, which includes a  booming job market  — non-farm payroll employment grew by 353,000 in January and an average of 255,000 a month last year — is not reflected in  President Biden ’s poll ratings. Though its population is larger, America’s monthly rate of job creation is bigger than the UK’s recent annual rate. Despite this, and the fact that I cannot think of any circumstances in which Donald Trump would be allowed to stand again for office in this country, most polls show that he holds a small though  narrowing lead over Biden . There are, it seems to me, two explanations. One is that many US voters find it impossible to square an ageing and infirm president with a strong, job-creating economy. They think his dodderiness, if that is a word, is a symbol of the country’s economic performance even though in reality it is not. Nor, in any meaningful sense, can Biden’s economic record be said to be inferior to that of  Trump . Under Trump’s first term which admittedly ended with the pandemic, growth averaged less than 1.5 per cent a year. The average under Biden, though benefiting from the recovery from Covid, has been 3.4 per cent. The US economy grew by 2.5 per cent last year, in the face of aggressively rising interest rates, the same as in 2019. The second explanation is something you hear a lot in vox pops from America, particularly after presidential primaries, which is that it is all about gas prices, not what we use for central heating, but what Americans mean when they should be saying petrol or diesel. For UK drivers, US prices for refuelling cars are a source of persistent envy. The average price across America is currently $3.23 (£2.55) a gallon. The UK average price for unleaded petrol is £1.44 a litre, which translates into £6.54 a gallon. There is an adjustment to be done, because an imperial gallon, ours, is bigger than a US gallon. Adjusting for that, and the fact that there are just under 3.8 litres in their gallons compared with just over 4.5 in ours, the US price per litre is about 67p, less than half the UK price, despite more than a decade of UK excise duty freezes (and one reduction), which will surely be maintained in next week’s budget. US gas prices are well below their peak of nearly $5 a gallon in mid-2022. They are about a third higher than when Biden was elected, when they were still depressed by the pandemic, but you would not think that was enough to offset the good record on jobs and growth. A different kind of gas price, the stuff we mainly use to keep our homes warm, has the potential to boost Sunak’s election hopes by pushing inflation, currently 4 per cent, to 2 per cent or below this spring. Whether it does so is the big question. Inflation’s fall from 11 to 4 per cent has not. America’s inflation rate is 3.1 per cent. The growth gap between the two economies is set to increase further this year. Goldman Sachs predicts that the UK economy will grow by 0.4 per cent this year, in line with the consensus, while America’s growth rate will exceed 2 per cent. The polls and the relative performance of the two economies suggest that Biden has a better chance of turning things around politically this year. Beyond that, and beyond this year’s elections, the question is whether the UK’s growth performance can ever again be mentioned in the same breath as that of America. Load-Date: February 27, 2024  End of Document
