   Blair arranged Starmer's Macron meeting as part of plot to reverse Brexit Scottish Daily Mail September 20, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 548 words Byline: Jason Groves Body   TONY Blair helped broker Keir Starmer's meeting with Emmanuel Macron yesterday as part of secret plans to 'reverse Brexit', it emerged last night. A Whitehall source said the former Prime Minister had used his EU contacts book to arrange the meeting on a day when the bloc released plans that could see Britain effectively rejoin the EU as an 'associate member'. The source said Sir Tony was 'convinced that Brexit is now a vote-winner for Labour' and was pushing his successor to open the door to reversing it. 'Blair is trying to convince Starmer that the more he edges towards saying Brexit is a disaster, the better Labour will do,' the source said. 'He believes that reversing Brexit can be a vote-winner and he is pushing that message very hard.' Sir Tony and Labour both declined to comment last night. The 'associate membership' proposal, championed by Paris and Berlin, would involve Britain observing EU law and accepting a form of free movement in return for access to the single market. One EU source said the deal had been drawn up with Labour in mind and was 'carefully balanced politically to be a potential place for Britain without the need to ever rejoin the EU or to hold a referendum'. Sir Keir, who campaigned for a second referendum, has denied he wants to take Britain back into the EU or the single market, saying only that he wants a 'closer' relationship and believes he can get a 'much better' deal with Brussels. Senior Tories warned he was preparing to take Britain back into the EU by the back door. Former business secretary Sir Jacob Rees- Mogg said: 'Keir Starmer has always been a starry-eyed Europhile, he's the champion of the second referendum, and now he wants to do it by stealth.' Health Secretary Steve Barclay said: 'Starmer's position is quite remarkable. He said he would respect the Brexit deal. Now he wants to reopen the Brexit deal. 'Now he wants to give control of immigration policy to the EU - let them decide who comes into the country. The EU themselves are saying he'd have to rejoin the single market. So the position he's setting out, once again, is a flip-flop. He keeps changing his mind on what he wants. 'We're clear we've got a deal on Brexit and we want to move forward. Starmer seems in the past to have called for a second referendum. Now he wants to go the full distance and reopen the deal.' The idea of a 'multi-speed' Europe has been championed by Mr Macron as a way of rapidly enlarging the bloc. Under the proposals, Britain could join the third tier as an 'associate member'. The UK would not have to sign up to 'ever closer union' and would pay a reduced membership fee - but it would have to accept the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and accept free movement in return for access to the single market. Labour declined to comment on whether Sir Keir had discussed the proposal with Mr Macron. A Labour spokesman said Sir Keir would use a planned review in 2025 to improve the Brexit deal, adding: 'Labour will seek a better deal for Britain. This does not involve any form of membership.' After the discussions, Sir Keir said the talks with the French president had been 'very political'. Downing Street said Rishi Sunak was not interested in pursuing associate membership of the EU. Comment - Page 16 'Starry-eyed Europhile' Graphic    At ease: Sir Keir relaxes in Paris Load-Date: September 20, 2023  End of Document
