   Brexit sends the British music industry to the dole CE Noticias Financieras English August 24, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 707 words Body    Brexit has brought about countless changes in the British landscape, including in the world of culture. Musicians, in particular, are being particularly affected by the new regulations, paperwork and visas they have to face in order to perform in the European Union.  The House of Lords warned the British government last year that, as a result of Brexit,musicians could find themselves unemployed en masse. This warning has come true: almost half of the musicians and employees in the sector (exactly 48%) say that they are now working less in the EU than they did before Brexit. Moreover, one in four musicians - 27.8% - say they have never performed outside the UK again. Thirty-nine percent admit that they have had to turn down work outside the British borders because of the costs now involved and 40% say they have had concerts in the EU that they had signed up for cancelled.  These are the results of a study entitled Paying the Price, conducted by the Independent Society of Musicians (ISM), based on interviews with 400 British musicians who have worked in Europe since January 2021 and whose results have just been published. Brexit "is quietly killing our music sector," laments mezzo-soprano Jennifer Johnston  "Even in EU countries where no visa or work permit is required, people in the music sector are limited by Schengen to spending, in a 180-day period (about six months), a maximum of 90 in an EU country. This limit has an impact on the amount of work people can do, effectively halving the number of days available and limiting travel for both work and pleasure," the study notes.  The report focuses attention on the obstacles faced primarily by solo musicians, emerging artists and small orchestras, but not only. And it concludes that the Brexit has "lost income for both musicians and the British economy," affecting job prospects, putting creativity at risk and weakening the UK's strength in the music industry.  "Music contributes almost £6 billion (about (EURO)7 billion) to the UK economy and the creative industries, broadly speaking, account for £116 billion (about (EURO)135 billion)," said ISM chief executive Deborah Annetts, who estimates that since January 2021 the total amount of music revenue lost amounts to about £450,000, about (EURO)525,000. "We urge the government to make Brexit work for the well-being of our musicians and our economy," she added, stressing that the UK's exit from the European Union "should never have meant that British musicians cannot share their talent with our closest neighbors."  Brexit "is quietly killing our music sector and it is time for the government to reverse the damage done before it is too late," lamented mezzo-soprano Jennifer Johnston. The total amount of lost revenue is estimated at some £450,000, or 525,000 euros.  Time limits, permits and visas, social security, taxes, customs clearance for musical and technical instruments and equipment, copyright directives, validation of driving licenses and vehicle licenses are all part of the administrative hell that British artists who want to work in the EU have had to deal with since Brexit .  However, this is a situation that not only worries small musicians. British music legends such as Elton John have raised their voices, complaining about the extra costs they have to face since Brexit when touring EU countries. Thom Yorke, leader of Radiohead, has also made his voice heard, calling the British government "soft", while the leader of the indie group The Charlatans has accused the Executive of "treating artists with contempt".  Among the recommendations that the Independent Society of Musicians (ISM) makes to the British government to try to solve the problem is to negotiate with Brussels a visa that allows British musicians and those who work with them to spend more than 90 days every six months in the EU. "Will music survive Brexit?" asked SIW in an earlier study. And it is the question that organization continues to ask.  Brexit has brought countless changes to the British landscape, including that of the world of culture. Musicians, in particular, are being hit especially hard by the new regulations, paperwork and visas they have to deal with in order to perform in the European Union.  Load-Date: August 25, 2023  End of Document
