   Brexit catastrophe for UK SMEs: 96% want to return to EU single market CE Noticias Financieras English November 21, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1228 words Body   "Do you regret having held the referendum?". When absolute chaos reigned in early 2019 in a Westminster incapable of managing Brexit, journalists approached former Prime Minister David Cameron as he was leaving the house for his morning running session. He looked good. The tan on his skin helped and contrasted with the winter-pale-white tone of his interlocutors. He was fresh from a vacation in Costa Rica, where he had stayed with his wife Samantha - daughter of an aristocrat - and their children in a 1,981-euro-a-night hotel. "No," he replied,"but I regret losing it and the difficulties we are having in implementing the result." He then began to run accompanied by his bodyguards.  That was one of his last public appearances. But this Monday he could be seen again, in all his glory, entering the unelected Upper House of Parliament to officially become Lord Cameron of Chipping Norton. Seven years after the historic consultation (with his resounding resignation after losing it), Cameron returns as Foreign Secretary while the British are dealing with the consequences of a divorce that is still being negotiated -Gibraltar remains in limbo- and which, far from the promised land predicted by the Eurosceptics, still has no economic benefit. In fact, quite the opposite: the Government's own Office for Budget Responsibility estimates the impact on GDP at 4%.  Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have been the hardest hit, as they lack the influence and connections of larger companies, so their voices have been conspicuous by their relative absence from the debate on the new UK-EU trading relationship under the terms of the deal struck in extremis at Christmas 2020 just days before the transition process ended.  94% of UK SMEs claim that leaving the bloc has negatively affected their business, 96% would like to return to the Single Market and 92% to the Customs Union. On the other hand, 53% have more paperwork and 25% have had to cut their workforce. These are the conclusions of the recent survey by the European Movement, the organization founded by Winston Churchill in 1948 to promote the relationship between the states of Europe, which stresses that there are no differences between sectors or geographical regions. Even in Northern Ireland, which has a different agreement due to the peculiarities of the border with the Republic of Ireland, they suffer negative effects.    There are always exceptions. For Andrew Hassard, on a personal level Brexit was "a tragedy", but on a professional level, the divorce has benefited his bicycle business. Still, most of the voices collected in the recent survey share Carol's tone. She ran a small company in Devon dedicated to bridal lingerie. They used satin from Italy, elastics from Spain and Germany, and the manufacturer was in Bulgaria. With Brexit it ended up closing because it was "a nightmare in terms of customs formalities."  The former Brexit negotiator for the EU, Michel Barnier, said in a recent interview with the Financial Times that "UK ministers did not know the consequences" of leaving the bloc.  Bad news for Sunak  This is not encouraging news for Premier Rishi Sunak, who this Monday announced precisely that "supporting business" is one of his major objectives to achieve greater economic growth.  His only hope for political survival has always been to present himself as a moderate, hard-working man who speaks through achievements. Sunak - who voted for Brexit, but has always maintained a pragmatic and moderate stance -knows he does not have a sweeping personality and is incapable of delighting masses as his controversial predecessor did. But he invited a skeptical nation to judge him on his promises.  The problem is that, of the first five (halving inflation this year, reducing National Health System waiting lists, reducing debt, growing the economy and, most controversially of all, stopping illegal shipping), he has only delivered on one. And even the like-minded media themselves find it debatable to what extent he can take credit for reducing inflation (in October 4.6% compared to 10% at the beginning of the year) or is this largely due to global factors beyond his control. The UK's tax burden is growing, cutting taxes, developing sustainable energy, supporting entrepreneurs and providing world-class education.  The tax burden in the UK is at its highest level since records began 70 years ago, according to the think tank Institute for Fiscal Studies. Sunak has long been under pressure from within his ranks to reduce it ahead of a general election due next year, where the Labor opposition holds a more than 20-point lead. "It will take discipline and we have to prioritize," says the premier, "but over time we can and will reduce it.  Ahead of Wednesday's key meeting with the so-called Autumn Statement, the budget package presented by the Executive to update economic measures in the middle of the fiscal year, most Conservative MPs believe that the inheritance tax should be reduced. However, there is concern that doing so before taxes for workers are cut could backfire politically. Especially after the controversial appointment of billionaire Lord Cameron as Foreign Secretary.  The politically more expedient path, therefore, would be to cut income tax. Although there are growing doubts that there is some kind of magic formula to turn the polls around. The recent Cabinet reshuffle has only further dented the Downing Street tenant's popularity. The mark given to him by the electorate in the latest polls is devastating: 44 negative points. Last September, those who voted for Brexit gave him a -23, while Tory voters gave him +1. Now, however, it has registered a -31 among pro-Brexit voters and a -12 among Conservatives.  Tempers in the formation are so desperate that there is even beginning to be talk of the possibility of a change of leader (it would be the fourth since summer 2022). "People say it would be crazy, but dismissing a prime minister who won a majority of 80 seats [referring to Boris Johnson] also seemed so and finally it was done, so I no longer rule anything out," assured from anonymity an MP to The Telegraph. "Sunak was never elected, he's reaping the worst poll ratings I've ever read in my life and he's not delivering on fundamental promises. It's very hard to see who is going to defend that," he added.  Anything can happen already in that parallel world that Westminster has become. But it seems increasingly clear that, after more than 13 years in power, the next election will mark the end of an era for the Tories. They will leave Downing Street. But Lord Cameron will stay in the Upper House of Parliament. "Do you regret having held the referendum?". When, at the beginning of 2019, absolute chaos reigned in a Westminster unable to manage the Brexit, journalists approached former Prime Minister David Cameron as he was leaving the house for his morning running session. He looked good. The tan on his skin helped and contrasted with the winter-pale-white tone of his interlocutors. He was fresh from a vacation in Costa Rica, where he had stayed with his wife Samantha - daughter of an aristocrat - and their children in a 1,981-euro-a-night hotel. "No," he replied,"but I regret losing it and the difficulties we are having in implementing the result." He then began to run accompanied by his bodyguards.  Load-Date: November 22, 2023  End of Document
