   Brexit outcome has been 'average to poor', says Wetherspoon boss The Daily Telegraph (London) October 28, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 33 Length: 337 words Byline: Daniel Woolfson Body   THE outcome of Brexit has been "average to poor", the boss of JD Wetherspoon has said. Tim Martin, who was a fierce campaigner for leaving the EU, believes Britain has not fully embraced a "free trade approach" since its exit. The pub chain founder said the UK Government has missed an opportunity to eliminate tariffs on thousands of products, which means prices are not as cheap as they should be. He said: "The EU system is highly protectionist, with taris being charged on over 12,000 non-EU imported products. Brexit oered the opportunity to eliminate these taris, reducing prices for consumers. However, there are still tariffs on 10,000 products, including rice, bananas and coee." Despite his negative assessment, Mr Martin does not regret supporting the Leave campaign. He said: "Brexiteers and remainers often don't understand Brexit. What Brexit is, for better or for worse, is the people you elect to make the decision. "Democracy means you can vote people in and vote them out. It's not a panacea. And in any five years, it doesn't guarantee that you're going to make progress. But it's got a very good track record - from South Korea compared to North, and North America versus South. "It doesn't mean you won't get a f------ idiot in charge from time to time." The UK businessman became the subject of controversy for his support of Brexit, particularly after he publicised his views on beer mats across his 900 pubs. His ties to Brexit previously led to him supporting Boris Johnson's Conservative Party, although he has since hinted he will vote for Labour in the next election. However, when asked if he has been approached by Sir Keir Starmer as part of the Labour leader's so-called Prawn Cocktail Oensive 2.0, Mr Martin said: "He's not oered me any f------ prawns. "I think they are reaching out to people, but they draw the line at me." As for the hospitality industry, Mr Martin said higher drinks prices are forcing some customers to stay at home rather than socialising out - which has led to many pubs closing. Graphic    JD Wetherspoon boss Tim Martin says he does not regret supporting Brexit Load-Date: October 28, 2023  End of Document
