   Brexit-backing Wetherspoons boss Tim Martin 'in line for knighthood' The National (Scotland) December 28, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 313 words Byline: Adam Robertson Body   BREXIT-BACKING pub tycoon Tim Martin is in line for a knighthood in the King-s New Year Honours list, according to reports. The founder and boss of Wetherspoons has been nominated for services to business, according to MailOnline. The chain is one of the country-s biggest pub firms with 875 sites across the UK. Business secretary Kemi Badenoch (below) reportedly pushed for Martin-s candidacy behind the scenes, arguing it is wrong for successful entrepreneurs to be overlooked because they supported Brexit. Nigel Farage has already welcomed the news, hailing Martin as a -Brexit legend- while Jacob Rees-Mogg said he was -delighted-. Martin backed a hard-line approach to Brexit, arguing the economic impacts were worthwhile trade-offs for greater democracy in the UK. Asked in June whether or not he had any regrets about the referendum, the pub boss told LBC: -Have I regrets? No, I think, for humanity to survive, I think we need democracy. We need democracy in China. -We need democracy in Russia - especially in the nuclear age - and my bone to pick with the EU is you don-t elect the president by universal suffrage and MEPs can-t initiate legislation and the ECJ, the court, isn-t accountable to parliament.- Martin previously grabbed headlines when he told staff to go to work at Tesco amid uncertainty over their futures due to the pandemic. READ MORE: Scotland Office -doesn-t know- how many staff work in Edinburgh hub He indicated the company would not continue to pay employees who weren-t working after pubs in the UK were forced to close. Instead, he said supermarkets were hiring and added: -I know that all our trade now has gone to supermarkets. Not only our trade, but the trade from cafes, leisure centres, restaurants. -So we have had lots of calls from supermarkets - Tesco alone want 20,000 people to join them. That-s half the amount of people who work in our pubs.- Load-Date: December 31, 2023  End of Document
