   Brexit could still transform Britain but neither Sunak nor Starmer is a true believer Mail on Sunday (London) June 24, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 25 Length: 1497 words Byline: ANDREW NEIL Body   IT WAS seven years ago yesterday that the country voted, by a narrow margin, to leave the European Union and it's fair to say neither Remainers nor Brexiteers are particularly happy about it. The Remainers are naturally put out that we left at all, with a hardcore still scheming to get us back in - though so far, it must be said, without any visible sign of progress. Even Keir Starmer's Labour party, once mustard keen to thwart Brexit from happening at all despite the referendum result, has seemingly abandoned that project (at least for now). But Brexiteers are just as grumpy, some wallowing in buyer's remorse because the benefits of Brexit have not materialised to anything like the extent they were promised. Their disappointment, even regret, was clearly on display during Thursday night's BBC1 Question Time, which came from the Essex seaside town of Clacton, which voted solidly for Brexit in 2016 - as had everybody in the audience. A poll taken beforehand showed that, though 70 per cent still supported Brexit, 20 per cent had changed their minds and 10 per cent were swithering. I was surprised, given the paucity of plusses since leaving the EU, that 70 per cent still backed Brexit. Tony Blair's former communications guru Alastair Campbell, donning the mantle of the Rabid Remainer which he invariably wears during his all too frequent studio outings, told the audience that they had been lied to by the Brexiteers. This was a bit rich coming from the man who was propagandistin-chief for the invasion of Iraq in 2003, which was both illegal and based on what was revealed to be a demonstrably false assertion that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction. Looking back on that fateful referendum vote, what is striking is not so much the lying as how both sides got so many big things wrong. The Remainers told us that, if we voted to leave, the economy would be immediately plunged into recession, house prices would collapse and unemployment would soar. None of that materialised. Leavers assured us that quitting would be a walk in the park, that Brussels would give us a sweetheart deal because our economy was so important to the EU and that the rest of the world would quickly form an orderly queue to do fresh free-trade deals with us. We now know from bitter experience that it did not exactly pan out that way. Even more striking, with the benefit of hindsight, is what was barely debated at all during the referendum campaign. I interviewed most of the major protagonists on prime-time TV in the run up to the vote. None, not even the Remainers, mentioned we'd have to pay a multi-billion euro exit fee for the privilege of departing. Nor did they spend any time confronting the fact that Northern Ireland and its open border with the Republic of Ireland would constitute a major stumbling block to any clean break with the EU. It didn't even cross Brexiteers' minds that Brussels would use the negotiations as a punishment beating pour encourager les autres. The EU's imperative was to stop any other member from following the British example. So, from day one, it had to make Britain's departure as expensive and uncomfortable as possible. It pretty much succeeded. Even the staunchest Eurosceptics on the Continent now don't propose an exit of their own. Brussels was hugely helped by the post-referendum failure of the British political system. The usual Tory back-stabbing meant that, far from a committed Brexiteer taking over from David Cameron as Prime Minister, delivering Brexit fell to Theresa May, an outof-her-depth Remainer who saw Brexit as a problem to be solved rather than an opportunity to be enthusiastically grasped. Her position became impossible when she called an unnecessary general election in 2017 - and promptly lost her majority. Cue the pro-Remain Blob in Parliament, the civil service, the law, the quangocracy and the media to marshal its forces in a bid to stop Brexit in its tracks. It was the most depressing, debilitating, soul-destroying period in British politics I have ever covered. And the Blob almost won. Only the overdue defenestration of May and her belated replacement by Boris 'Get Brexit done' Johnson saw the Remainers off. His landslide election victory in December 2019 reflected a widespread desire, including on the part of many Remainers, to be done with Brexit and move on. At last, or so it seemed, the country could concentrate on its post-Brexit future and confront the challenges and opportunities that it offered. But within months we were stricken by an epochal pandemic and, even as that receded, Russia's invasion of Ukraine - the first demanding all the resources of government be devoted to it, the second exacerbating a looming cost of living crisis which is still with us today. Brexit has delivered so little after seven years because, after three wasted years under May, the British government simply didn't have the talent or the bandwidth to capitalise on it and deal with Covid and the fallout from the war in Ukraine. Perhaps no government could have coped well with all of that. But the disappointments of Brexit were made worse by the fact that those most enthusiastic about it - such as Johnson and Michael Gove - had no real idea how to take advantage of it once they'd won the www.referendum.No wonder Brussels managed to tie them in knots again and again. Brexiteers can still take heart from some achievements which would have been harder or impossible inside the EU: the speedy vaccine rollout; taking the lead in aiding Ukraine; consolidating existing free trade deals and agreeing new ones; striking a significant new military and technology pact with America and Australia (Aukus); and, above all, the trade agreement with the countries of the Pacific Rim, which opens doors to the globe's fastest growing economies at a time when the EU is in relentless economic and geopolitical decline. But none of that, even combined, amounts to the step change in Britain's circumstances that Brexiteers assured us leaving the EU would herald. It is, of course, early days for such a major shift in Britain's status. But I fear those still harbouring the Brexit faith are in for slim pickings for the rest of the decade. For a start, neither Labour nor the Conservatives want to talk about it. Every time Labour's Jenny Chapman was asked about a Brexit-related matter on Thursday's Question Time special she ignored it and fell back on predictable scatter-gun attacks on the Tories. At least Labour turned up: the Government couldn't even be bothered to send a minister to participate in a debate about the defining political issue of our age. It's clear Rishi Sunak's heart is not in concocting a radical Brexit Britain agenda. With his government's increases in corporation and income taxes he's already taking Britain in the opposite direction. When he discussed the incredible potential of artificial intelligence with the Biden administration in Washington D.C. recently, his emphasis was not on exploiting it but on regulating it, showing how the Brussels mindset still grips the British political elite, even that part which was supposedly pro-Leave. A Starmer government is even less likely to do anything to capitalise on Brexit. His pitch is based on getting closer to the EU, even realigning more with its rules and regulations. He seems not to have noticed he would once again be hitching us to one of the slowest-growing regions in the world. I understand, despite protestations to the contrary, the fears of those who think Starmer's real agenda is to take us back into the EU. He has, after all, ditched most of the principles that got him elected Labour leader. And the polls show a majority in favour of rejoining. But such polls are meaningless. Nobody knows on what terms we'd rejoin except that they'd be a lot more unfavourable than the ones we had. Nobody knows the state the EU would be in should we ever be ready to rejoin - or whether it would even be worth rejoining. At the moment it is leaderless and drifting nowhere fast. Even the fabled Franco-German duumvirate that once gave it direction is disintegrating. Starmer is many things but he's not daft. Above all he's pragmatic. He knows that any move to rejoin the EU means he'd lose the Red Wall as quickly as he's likely to retake it come the election. So whoever wins the next election, it will not produce a government committed to making the most of Brexit. A dynamic digital economy. Low, competitive taxes for individuals and business. Light-touch regulation of new technologies. A robust welfare-towork programme to tackle poverty and labour shortages. The reskilling of our people for the digital age. All that is probably easier to achieve outside than inside a sclerotic EU. But nobody is offering it. As a result, when it comes to Brexit, we face a lost decade. Instead of dynamism, we face a lost decade What's striking is how both sides got so many big things wrong The Brussels mindset still grips our political elite Load-Date: June 24, 2023  End of Document
