   Brexit negotiations had scant regard for unionists Sunday Independent September 17, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 27 Length: 772 words Byline: Éamon Ó Cuív Body   An Taoiseach was reported recently as saying he expected to see a united Ireland in his lifetime. He also spoke about how people in the Republic need to start thinking more about how unionists would be accommodated in the event of unity coming about. "It's really important that those people in a united Ireland should feel wanted, should be respected," he said. Lofty sentiments, indeed, and ones for which I have worked throughout my political career. I have long believed that in the way the Government dealt with the aftermath of Brexit they showed scant regard for the opinions of unionists or any understanding of the difficulty a "hard border" in the Irish Sea would pose for them. It is fair to say that before the result of the Brexit referendum became known, very little consideration was given to the effect of it on the island of Ireland. The debate in Britain blithely ignored the issue, while the EU seemed to believe that the unthinkable would never happen. Even after the referendum, the EU, instead of accepting the decision, continued to believe that with a little bit of tough talk the British would "come to their senses" and reverse their decision. It was only with the realisation that "Brexit meant Brexit" that the consequences this could have on the island of Ireland dawned. We were caught in the middle of what was fundamentally a dispute between the island of Britain and the EU, who were facing up to each other like heavyweight boxers. Britain was determined to show she wanted a clean break from the EU and the EU was determined to make this as difficult as possible as a warning to any other country thinking of leaving. It was at this crucial moment Ireland should have avoided getting caught in the crossfire and instead should have instituted informal all-island talks with all parties, and particularly with pro-Brexit unionists to formulate a way that would have the minimum impact on trade and travel within this island and between these islands, with particular reference to the legal status of Northern Ireland as per the Good Friday Agreement. I believe if such talks had taken place, it would quickly be understood that there could be no hard border within the island of Ireland but that a hard border as proposed by the EU between Northern Ireland and Britain was also anathema to the unionists and deeply offensive to them. Such talks would have led to a recognition early on that Ireland and particularly Northern Ireland needed a unique, bespoke solution. My view was that the Irish government, having had these talks and parallel discussions with the British government and the EU, should then have told both the EU and British government that this third way was needed and that no solution was possible that did not have the goodwill of both nationalist and unionist in Ireland. What we would have been fighting for is something much nearer to the post Windsor Framework arrangement than the original proposals put forward by the EU, which the Irish Government endorsed completely. When the protocol was agreed, in a moment of desperation by Boris Johnson to get Brexit done, there was a triumphalism shown by the Irish Government and a disdain for the difficulty this would cause many unionists that shocked me. We are now living with the short-term consequences of our actions, with no executive and assembly in Stormont and a residual feeling in the unionist community that, despite the sweet words, the reality of a united Ireland would be one where their views, aspirations and feelings, when it suited the majority on the island, would be disregarded. In other words, they are judging official Ireland based on our actions and not on sweet words. Those of the majority tradition in Ireland rightly criticise how unionism treated nationalists and republicans in Northern Ireland in the past. After the way Brexit was handled, we need to give hard evidence that such treatment would not be reversed, in any way, in a new dispensation on this island. Speaking to a pro-Brexit unionist one day, I said that I passionately believed in and wished for full independent sovereignty for this island, but only if firmly convinced that in such a new situation the unionist community would be fully included in all decision-making. In 1690, in what was in reality a European war fought on Irish soil for the throne of England, the Irish took different sides with disastrous long-term consequences. I hope we learn from history and quickly undo the damage of the last seven years that has only widened the chasm between to two main traditions on this island. Éamon Ó Cuív is a Fianna Fáil TD for Galway West Load-Date: September 17, 2023  End of Document
