   BREXIT BLAMED AS SHOPS RUN SHORT OF BOOKER PRIZE WINNER'S NOVEL Sunday Independent December 24, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 25 Length: 354 words Byline: JOHN BURNS Body   It's on course to be the bestselling book in Ireland this year - but some shops have been unable to get enough supplies of Paul Lynch's Prophet Song, due to bureaucratic delays caused by Brexit. Since winning the prestigious literary prize on November 26, the dystopian story about Ireland falling victim to fascism has enjoyed the traditional 'Booker bounce' in sales. But ensuring enough copies of it are available has proven a challenge for its publisher, Oneworld Publications, a relatively small independent company. "Up to 20,000 copies were stuck in a warehouse for a week or two, while shops in Ireland had run out of stock," one industry source said. "Following Brexit, books coming from Britain to Ireland can be held up by Customs. "In the past it usually took about three days between a book leaving a printing house in Britain and arriving here. Now, you have to add up to a week onto the expected delivery time." Earlier this month Waterstones in Cork posted on social media that "it has been many years since a Booker Prize winner resonated as strongly with our customers as Prophet Song. After extraordinary demand, we can confirm it is now back in stock, with plenty of copies available". Oneworld said yesterday it has now shipped 45,000 copies of Prophet Song to Ireland. A spokeswoman for OneWorld said: "Yes, Brexit has definitely introduced complications and delays shipping books to Ireland. We regularly have single copies that we sent to reviewers in Ireland returned - often weeks later - which is very expensive as well as frustrating, and I know other publishers have faced the same problems." Industry sources say all bookshops now do have enough copies of Prophet Song, which sold over 10,000 copies last week alone and is likely to be the Christmas bestseller. It may go on to become the biggest selling title of 2023, eclipsing Strange Sally Diamond by Liz Nugent. Since Brexit, the UK and Irish book markets are no longer treated as a single entity. Distributors have to take account of the different tax arrangements, and the big publishers have all now built in extra time buffers to allow for delays. Graphic    Paul Lynch with his book 'Prophet Song' during the photocall for the Booker Prize. Picture: Getty Load-Date: December 24, 2023  End of Document
