   Brexit barrier for French school trips lifted; Rules revised Financial Times (London, England) November 3, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 466 words Byline: PETER FOSTER; LUCY FISHER; SARAH WHITE Body   Post-Brexit border bureaucracy for French school trips is to be drastically reduced as part of plans to revamp educational exchanges with Europe, which have plunged since the UK left the EU. Government insiders confirmed that rules to be introduced in coming months would allow children on trips from France to use national identity cards, while the requirement that non-EU citizens obtain a visa to travel with classmates would be dropped. The revised rules, which could be extended to other EU member states, emerged after Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and French President Emmanuel Macron pledged at a summit in March to "ease the travel" of school groups. The educational travel industry has lobbied intensively for the changes after surveys showed school trips to the UK from the EU had fallen by up to twothirds in the year after post-Brexit border controls were introduced. Emma English, executive director of British Educational Travel Association, said the industry, which Beta estimates has a value of at least £1.5bn a year to the economy, would be pushing for the new rules to start as quickly as possible. "This would be greatly, greatly welcomed from all sides of the industry. It can't come soon enough, and the sooner it can be rolled out to include other EU countries, the better for everyone." Daryl Taylor, managing director of Linguastay, a homestay accommodation provider, said the move would help restore the UK's position as a top destination for European youth groups, and urged the government to act quickly. "It is a move that will enrich our country financially and culturally. It does, however, need to be rolled out urgently before the mindset of the organisers of such groups is fixed on alternative destinations they've chosen over the past two years. We hope it's not too late," he said. Before Brexit, EU children on school trips were able to travel to the UK on a group visa using the bloc's so-called "list of travellers" scheme, with some using national ID cards instead of a passport. After Brexit, the government left the scheme and required all EU children to travel with a passport and all non-EU children in the bloc to get a visa - a process that led to some children being left behind and many schools cancelling their trips. Schools reported "Kafkaesque" experiences with the Home Office, where children on fixed-price trips were de- nied visas for having insufficient funds or not having parental consent. Edward Hisbergues, the director of PG Trips, a travel company with clients that suffered under the post-Brexit regime, said the changes would help to rehabilitate the UK's reputation in the EU as a place of welcome. The deal could be agreed by year-end. 'It can't come soon enough, and the sooner it can be rolled out to include other EU countries, the better' Load-Date: November 2, 2023  End of Document
