   Brexit's role in tragedy of steel plant job losses South Wales Echo January 20, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 18 Length: 370 words Body   TATA'S shocking announcement that they are to stop making new blast furnace steel in Port Talbot with thousands of job losses marks a tragic end of an era and is yet another example of the disaster of Brexit. They thought were getting opportunities they've ended is the dole Chris Tata own two plants in Europe, Port Talbot and IJmuiden in the Netherlands. They could have kept making steel from raw materials at both plants but have chosen to close their blast furnaces in the UK. When the UK was in the EU it made commercial sense to keep both plants going as costs were similar. Now the UK is outside the EU it makes commercial sense to keep open a plant with easy access to the vast EU market and close the nearby plant that has easy access to a far smaller market, the UK. Had we remained in the EU it would have been very difficult for a foreign owned company like Tata to show preference of one EU country over another and, in effect, close their new steel-making industry, leaving Port Talbot only able to recycle old steel. Only Scunthorpe's Chinese-owned blast furnace now remains in the UK and that plant, apparently, is under review unless the Chinese can blackmail the UK Government into giving them a massive subsidy. When that closes the UK will be the only country in the G20 without a capability to make steel from raw materials. Brexit is such a tragedy on many levels. It's sad the people of Port Talbot chose it by a massive 71.6%. They fell for the "false prophet" promises of the likes of Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson. They thought they were getting new opportunities but all they've ended up with is the dole queue and the UK is now a rule taker instead of a rule maker with our biggest trading partner, the EU. It's time the leaders and politicians of the Brexit campaign were brought to account for the consequences of the massive mess and misery they've caused through running a referendum campaign riddled with deceit. they new but all up with queue... Chris Lewis Cathays, Cardiff It's time the of  shocking that stop blast in  account  They thought they were getting new opportunities but all they've ended up with is the dole queue...  a of is  the Brexit.  Cardiff  Chris Lewis  two Europe, Port  Bus Load-Date: January 20, 2024  End of Document
