   Brexit, perceived as a mistake, by Editorial CE Noticias Financieras English August 5, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 609 words Body   Some 57% of Britons currently believe that Brexit - the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union and loss of its membership - was a mistake. This percentage rises to 75% among 18-24 year olds. Some 51% of Britons would vote today to remain in the EU if the question of Brexit were put to them again in a new referendum. It could be argued that this 51% does not represent a Copernican shift, since in the decisive referendum of June 23, 2016, pro-remain supporters already won 48.1% of the vote, while Brexiters reached 51.9%. But, even so, the conviction that the Brexit was a mistake is advancing among the British, and if it does not do so at a faster pace it is because neither of the two major parties would like to admit it now: the Conservatives should assume that the call for the referendum was a monumental blunder; Labour, which is looking forward to returning to power next year, does not want to make the Brexiters in their ranks uncomfortable. And, also, because national pride, which to a large extent drove Brexit, survives, albeit eroded by reality. The idea of a return to the EU is advancing very slowly in the United Kingdom. Indeed, reality tells us that in the seven years since the referendum, and in the two and a half long years since the separation was ratified and completed on December 31, 2020, ending a relationship of almost half a century, things have not gone any better for Britain. Four points of GDP have been lost there; inflation - 7.9% - is the highest in the G-7; trade between the UK and the EU - a market with 500 million potential customers - has fallen by 25% in both directions; hundreds of thousands of qualified foreign professionals have left the country; and the City of London, the financial capital, is losing ground to Paris, Frankfurt, Amsterdam, Milan and other cities where transactions do not encounter the difficulties caused by Brexit. As we pointed out above, neither the Conservative Party nor the Labour Party will immediately raise the flag of the return to the EU. But that sentiment is spreading. The term Regrexit has already been coined, as opposed to Brexit, to associate the idea of regret, of repentance, with that of leaving. And it is not ruled out that a return to power of Labour, led by Keir Starmer, will pave the way for a reconsideration of Brexit. Although, at best, it is unlikely that anything decisive along these lines will happen before ten years from now. Brexit had some positive side effects. In its happy days, the virus spread to other European countries, where concepts such as Frexit , in France, or Italexit , in Italy (in Spain, a country of strong Europeanist conviction, it did not prosper) were coined. But then, in view of the results harvested in the United Kingdom, these segregationist movements, with a lethal potential for the EU, subsided. Lesson learned. The other great lesson to be learned from Brexit is so obvious that it is somewhat embarrassing to insist on it: unity is strength, division weakens. This has always been the case. And we have had the opportunity to prove it once again with the reaction to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which has reinvigorated the EU, strengthening its internal ties and encouraging its rearmament in every sense of the word. Meanwhile, British diplomacy has been relegated to a less relevant role. For all these reasons, the balance of Brexit can only be negative for the UK, and also for the EU. From an economic point of view, this was perfectly foreseeable. But populism and the emotional factors that often prevail in politics over the rational ones wanted to ignore it. Now things would seem to be different. Load-Date: August 7, 2023  End of Document
