   Brexit and Covid leave Ottolenghi short of chefs The Daily Telegraph (London) November 30, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 3 Length: 398 words Byline: Daniel Woolfson Body   YOTAM OTTOLENGHI, the chef credited with popularising ingredients such as date molasses and sumac in Britain, has been forced to cut opening hours at his restaurants because of a shortage of chefs. Emilio Foa, the chief executive of Ottolenghi's restaurant company, which includes Nopi and Rovi in London's West End, said it had struggled to hire following Brexit and Covid. Mr Foa said: "Recruitment of talented chefs in the wake of the UK's cessation of membership of the EU, and Covid-19 continues to prove challenging and has forced us to change operating hours in some circumstances. "It was decided to change opening hours for a small number of our restaurants post-Covid, and we have found these new trading hours to be successful." Nopi and Rovi have recently stopped opening for breakfast service, but a company spokesman said this was unrelated to Brexit. The Ottolenghi Spitalfields deli also now ends lunch service 15 minutes earlier compared with last year, according to its website. Mr Ottolenghi and his business partner Sami Tamimi, a Palestinian chef and author, opened a bakery-deli with just eight seats in Notting Hill in 2002. Their relaxed approach to dining won them a legion of fans and over the past two decades their restaurants and delis, which offer a blend of Middle Eastern cuisines, have expanded, while Mr Ottolenghi has become a household name. The 54 year-old chef is said to have sold more than 11million cookbooks. He previously warned his company could suffer labour shortages because of Brexit, telling The Atlantic in 2019 there had been "a much slower influx of Europeans coming to work with us". Restaurants and pubs have faced a scramble for talent over recent years amid a crippling shortage of staff. As well as a shortage of chefs, Mr Ottolenghi's restaurants have had disruption to the supply of crucial ingredients. Mr Foa said: "Various world events, including the Ukraine war, poor harvests and avian flu led to supply chain issues on some of our key products, but the chefs have always shown creativity in adapting our offering and menus." Sales in Mr Ottolenghi's outlets grew from £21million to £28million over the year to March 2023, newly filed accounts show, but pre-tax profits plunged from £6million to £769,671 as the chain was battered by soaring costs. 'Recruitment of talented chefs in the wake of [Brexit] and Covid is proving challenging' Load-Date: November 30, 2023  End of Document
