   Brexit and the border issue of migrants; Letters The Western Mail September 21, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 19 Length: 344 words Body   IT is certain that further revelations of the history of the Brexit referendum campaign, and the subsequent 'Get Brexit Done' withdrawal agreement, negotiated by PM Boris Johnson with the EU that gave us control over our borders, will all figure in the forthcoming general election campaign. Can I unearth both the first slogan... 'Get Brexit Done', and the second slogan… 'Control of our borders', as it is a concomitant part of the first slogan. Professor Thom Brooks, Professor of Law and Government at Durham University, launched the most comprehensive report into the issue of asylum seekers using small boats to cross the Channel to Britain. A key finding of his 55-page report is that the then Johnson Government's Brexit deal is a primary www.factor.No small boat arrivals in the UK are recorded prior to 2018, when the UK was a part of a returns arrangement with the EU, whereby anyone making the crossing could be returned. But the Johnson government's Brexit deal did not include any agreement on a new returns arrangement and so returning migrants became a far more difficult border issue - and small boat crossings grew quickly. Returning them to the EU is now not an option for our Border authorities. Other findings of the report are that the Government requires a new returns arrangement if it wants to make substantial progress in reducing migrant numbers. The second slogan - 'Control of our borders' - was the key to Mr Johnson's 'Get Brexit Done' slogan in the General Election campaign in the North East. It was that trade agreement he and his government agreed with the EU that did not include any agreement that would return any migrants to the EU country from whence they came. Boris Johnson's 'Getting Brexit Done' agreement closed that return option with the EU and resulted in the chaos that is the control of our borders. The 'Devon for Europe' group, with similar groups from around the UK, will be in London this Saturday (September 23) marching to Parliament Square; no doubt they will be making mention of this. Don Frampton Newton Abbot, Devon Load-Date: September 21, 2023  End of Document
