   Brexit critic Nissan says impact was minimal; Vocal opponent of EU departure says energy prices have bigger effect The Sunday Times (London) November 26, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS AND MONEY;BUSINESS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1 Length: 451 words Byline: Oliver Gill Body   Nissan bosses have declared that the impact of Brexit on its UK operations is now negligible and urged the country to be more optimistic about its prospects. The Japanese carmaking giant has previously been one of the most vocal critics of the decision to leave the EU, warning of the effect on its investments in its huge Sunderland plant. Chief executive Makoto Uchida told The Sunday Times that while Brexit had been a challenge, the UK would remain his company's primary European outpost for "the foreseeable future" and still be the company's most important market in Europe. Speaking as he announced a £2 billion upgrade of the Sunderland plant last week, he said: "If not, we would not be making this investment." Alan Johnson, Nissan's senior vicepresident of manufacturing and supply chain, added that while leaving the EU had made its operations in Britain "more bureaucratic... we quite quickly adapted. So that is just normal now". He downplayed the widespread belief that Brexit red tape would push up UK prices. "It's negligible. Much more significant are things like energy prices." Uchida, who took over at the helm of Nissan in December 2019 following the arrest of then chairman Carlos Ghosn for alleged financial misconduct, said he was baffled at how the British talk the country down: "I am quite surprised that people here in the UK are asking, 'Why UK?' We have great people and great talent here." Nissan, which directly employs 6,000 people in Sunderland, and supports 70,000 supply chain jobs, struck fear into the government shortly after the Brexit referendum. Bosses had warned that operating in the UK "would not be sustainable" if an appropriate deal with the European bloc could not be struck. However, last week Nissan announced that it was injecting £1.12 billion into its Sunderland works, with partners putting in a further £1 billion to fund a third battery-making gigafactory, paving the way for the plant to build electric versions of the Qashqai and Juke models. It is thought that UK taxpayers will contribute an additional £200 million towards the Nissan plant upgrade. Uchida refused to comment on how much money the government was putting in. "Electrification still needs support," he said. "We do have a strong relationship with the [UK] government." Uchida's upbeat assessment of Brexit Britain came shortly before business secretary Kemi Badenoch launched an Advanced Manufacturing Plan aimed at channelling public and private sector funding into industrial companies. Business leaders had been increasingly frustrated with the government's failure to come up with a strategy to provide targeted support to key industries. A growth plan at last? Page 2 Kemi Badenoch, page 3 Load-Date: November 26, 2023  End of Document
