   British public backs closer relationship with EU after Brexit, new poll shows The Independent (United Kingdom) December 10, 2023 Sunday 11:08 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 Independent Digital News and Media Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: UK POLITICS,UK; Version:4 Length: 516 words Byline: Athena Stavrou Highlight: Report suggests that almost half of the public now believe it was wrong to leave the EU, while only a third think it was right to do so Body   New research has suggested that more than half of the British public want a closerrelationship with the EU,  in a post-Brexit shift of opinion.  A poll conducted by British Future  found that 52 per cent would like the UK  to have a closer relationship with the European Union. In comparison, just 12 per cent said they would prefer a more distant relationship  and 27 per cent said they would keep the status quo. Pollsters say the research was based on a nationally representative survey as well as a series of discussion groups with people in London, Peterborough and Stockport. It found that almost half of Britain thinks the UK’s relationship with the EU is more important for peace, stability and prosperity than our relationship with the US or with Commonwealth nations.  Britons felt most strongly about closer EU collaboration on issues such as counterterrorism, trade, and science/research cooperation. Six in 10 also supported closer collaboration on migration for work and study. The director of British Future, Sunder Katwala, said the findings of the report could encourage a new government to try to expand Britain’s relationship with the EU. “These findings show why there was little fuss over Rishi Sunak increasing cooperation with the EU on the Windsor Framework and the Horizon scheme for science. A new government could try to go further,” he said. “Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves have talked about resetting the relationship with the EU. The public will give them space and permission for increasing pragmatic cooperation – though it remains unclear how much appetite there is for this in Brussels.” However, Mr Katwala added that these developments could bring into focus the challenges that come with reopening the Brexit debate. The report found that almost half of the public now believe it was wrong to leave the EU, while just over a third think it was right to do so. Labour and Conservative supporters were found to have polarised views on the subject, with 61 per cent of Conservative voters saying it was right to leave while 69 per cent of Labour supporters think it was the wrong decision. However, a majority of each group said they would welcome a less heated debate on the UK’s relationship with the EU.  Heather Rolfe, research director for British Future and co-author of the report, said that although there is clear support for a closer relationship with our neighbours in the EU, interest in rekindling the arguments about Brexit is low.  “There is clearly pragmatic support among the public in Britain for closer cooperation with our neighbours in the EU,” she said. “But people here do not feel European, and shared interests – in tackling terrorism or climate change, for example – resonate much more with people than the idea of shared values. “A new government would have political space to open up new conversations with Europe about closer collaboration on a wide range of issues. But that needs to be done gradually and with a focus on practical cooperation.  “Few people are interested right now in reigniting the polarising arguments of the Brexit debate.” Load-Date: December 11, 2023  End of Document
