   Broken Brexit: Scots firms still struggling with labour shortages dailyrecord.co.uk June 22, 2023 Thursday 4:30 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS,POLITICS; Version:1 Length: 1140 words Byline: By Andrew Quinn Highlight: The impact on hard-pressed Scottish businesses - already reeling from covid lockdown - that has emerged as the biggest Brexit fail. Body   The full extent of labour shortages across Scotland has been laid bare - with the building trade seeing more than half of firms struggling to find staff. The Daily Record’s BrokenBrexit series has been looking at the impact on Scotland of withdrawing from the EU all this week. But it is the impact on hard-pressed Scottish businesses - already reeling fromcovid lockdown - that has emerged as the biggest Brexit fail. Scottishacross a vast number of industries have reported labour shortages because of Brexit and now figures from the Scottish Government back up these concerns. Some 36.8 per cent of businesses in Scotland are experiencing a shortage of workers, according to Scottish Government estimates from a UK-wide Office of National Statistics survey earlier this month. Broken Brexit: Scots hospitality and tourism firms 'not listened to' over chronic labour shortages Scots fishermen who backed Brexit betrayed after Tories 'promised a new dawn' The worst hit industry was construction, with a 50.1 per cent shortage, followed by accommodation and food services on 44.4 per cent. Many of these sectors, from hospitality to farming, were reliant on people coming to Scotland from across the EU. But these workers are often no longer available because free movement of workers ended with Brexit - and the “settled status” system has been branded complex and off-putting for those that want to stay. Stephen Leckie, who owns Crieff Hydro among other hospitality businesses, has noticed the impact of Brexit. Before the first lockdown Crieff Hydro had 1050 staff. Between 20 and 25 per cent of them were from EU countries. It now has 860 workers and 70 vacancies, which means the business is missing eight per cent of the workforce it needs. The labour shortage has caused Leckie to close restaurants, curb the hours his establishments are open and reduce what they can offer. He said: “For our business, the vacancies are not just in the food and beverage areas but are also in the housekeeping staff, the self-catering teams, reception staff, hair and beauty staff. “Everywhere we look there are vacancies and that restricts the ability of our business to grow. “We’ve had to shut restaurants, restrict opening hours and restrict menus because we just don’t have the staff. “Even with the staff that we do have, we’re paying a whole lot more which puts inflation up. It’s difficult.” Crieff Hydro usually has 220 live-in members of staff. Many of these came from EU countries and returned to their home countries during lockdown. But they faced obstacles when it came to returning to Scotland. Leckie said: “What none of us realised is that getting back into the country was going to be nigh-impossible. There were no working visas. They wanted to come back with us but they simply couldn’t.” Leckie, who is also President of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said the problem was widespread. He said: “I’ve not spoken to any company in any part of Britain that says labour’s okay. “In Perth, in the last two weeks four businesses in hospitality have closed their doors saying that they can’t get enough staff to keep running. “Even businesses that are open, some are only open four or five days a week rather than seven days because they can’t get the staff.” Leckie wants Scotland to be given more powers to deal with the problem. He said: “I would like the Scottish Government to control immigration and release the working visas to make it easy for the good people of Europe to come and work in Scotland.” The UK Government has told businesses to fill the vacancies with British workers, but Leckie insists that has proved very difficult. He said: “Believe me, we’ve been trying to get British workers for decades in this industry. “People from the EU want to come here to learn English, they want to live in Scotland for a bit and they want to send money home as they can earn more money here.” Iain Brown runs Easter Grangemuir Farm in Pittenweem, Fife. He has been able to recruit some workers through the UK Government’s seasonal worker scheme, but it costs £300 per worker. He said it is difficult to encourage people to come from Eastern Europe and he is now having to recruit people from Western Asia, but that it is more expensive. Brown said: “It’s more expensive to recruit staff than before Brexit and there has been a significant cost added to fresh produce at a time when all costs are going up. “We used to have plenty of labour available from Eastern Europe but because of Brexit they no longer come. These workers were very productive and were keen to return each year. “We are now only managing to fill things in short-term but we need a commitment from the government that there is a long-term plan in place. “With farming fruit there is a long-term investment. We need to make sure that we can harvest it and we need to make sure that we have the labour to do that.” He said that the increased recruitment costs were causing prices to go up: “The free movement of labour made it easier and cheaper to recruit workers. Before Brexit we didn’t have to pay an agency. “Now consumers are paying more for their fruit and vegetables. The costs increase and farmers are not compensated.” SNP’s EU Accession spokesperson Alyn Smith said that Brexit had “devastated” Scottish companies. He said: “Businesses and consumers in Scotland continue to be hammered by Brexit - and things will only get worse. “Scottish businesses have been devastated by Brexit, with trade barriers and bureaucracy costing us billions of pounds, and spiralling the cost of living out of control. “That is why getting back into the EU, or at least the single market, gets more urgent by the day to avoid the inevitable additional costs and frictions of Brexit - and it is high time the pro-Brexit parties admit the consequences of their own plans for millions of people. “Westminster's decision to drag Scotland out of the world’s largest single market against its will has cost us billions of pounds, and spiralled the cost of living out of control. “And yet despite this obvious connection, both Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer remain committed to ‘making Brexit work’. “The SNP is the only party offering voters a real change through independence in Europe. With access to the single market, re-joining programmes such as Erasmus+, and restoring freedom of movement, an independent Scotland back in the EU will bring about sustained economic growth and prosperity. “At the next general election, only the SNP will put independence at the forefront so that Scotland can escape Brexit and Westminster control for good.” To sign up to the Daily Record Politics newsletter, click. Mhairi Black urges Douglas Ross to 'grow a backbone' over Boris Johnson sanctions SNP hammered by Labour in council by-election after Jordan Linden scandal Exams for fourth year pupils in Scotland set to be scrapped Load-Date: July 20, 2023  End of Document
