   Brussels bridles at Starmer's plan to seek 'much better' Brexit deal The Times (London) September 19, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10,11 Length: 1018 words Byline: Oliver Wright;Bruno Waterfield Body   The European Union will not agree to a "soft touch" Brexit deal with a future Labour government, Sir Keir Starmer has been warned, as Brussels played down the prospect of a significantly improved trade agreement with the UK. The Labour leader, who is due to meet President Macron of France in Paris today, has said he would give priority to getting a "much better deal for the UK" as part of a review of the existing trade deal due in 2025. But senior figures in London and Brussels have offered little hope of a "quick win" for Starmer, saying that the EU was wary of re-opening the Brexit debate, even with a new government in Westminster. They also warned that the review of the Trade and Co-operation Agreement (TCA) was more about "housekeeping" than reimagining the UK and EU's relationship, and that any move to negotiate the deal would need the backing of both the European Commission and the 27 member states. "Unless Starmer is prepared to take a quantum leap and change Labour's position on membership of the customs union then any renegotiation will really be not much more than a rebranding exercise," one EU source said. "You could call it the Dover deal, but it will still work in the same way." Starmer has said that his party wants to extend the trade agreement to cover food safety, as well as animal and plant regulations, in an attempt to reduce or even eliminate the need for additional checks at the border. But sources in Brussels said that this would require Britain to align with existing EU phytosanitary rules. This could be an issue for Labour as it could force them to repeal the Genetic Technology Act, which was designed to allow the UK to become a world leader in agricultural gene editing. The government might also need to amend its approach to free trade deals to ensure that they did not clash with any new obligations to the EU. Diplomats also stressed that any changes to agreements between the EU and Britain would have to be stable and election-proof, in the sense that a future change of government could not simply reverse them. The EU would also be tough on the price that a future government would have to pay for requests, at a time when European governments do not have Britain high on the agenda and face serious challenges, such as migration and future enlargement to admit Ukraine and the Western Balkans. "Starmer does not want to rejoin the EU or the single market. It is not a big change in the UK approach, so why should the Europeans rethink everything?" said a diplomat from a national government generally sympathetic to closer trade ties. "In terms of friction the TCA works better for the EU and countries with trade ties to the UK than it does for the Brits. What is in it for us? What do we get?" A diplomatic source involved in the TCA negotiations added: "Any new relationship would depend on the politics. The EU will insist on a balance of rights and obligations and there will be, as in Brexit overall, no cherry picking," a diplomatic source involved in the TCA negotiations said. Wolfgang Münchau, a European commentator and director of the Eurointelligence consultancy, suggests that now Northern Ireland and the Horizon research programme had been sorted out there was little space for Starmer. "Probably the biggest delusion yet to be unpicked is Sir Keir Starmer's repeated assertion that there is a better deal with the EU out there. This is simply not true," he wrote in his note to clients yesterday."If your bottom line is that you do not wish to rejoin the single market and the customs union, there really is not a lot more out there." Rory O'Donnell, a former civil servant and Brexit negotiator, now a partner at Penta Group, a consultancy on international agriculture, food and trade, sees possibilities if both sides want to move on. "If the president of the European Commission said the TCA review is a vehicle to explore some other options it would be odd to rule it out," he said. "Labour might have a list of issues, such as Erasmus, SPS, touring musicians, and the commission might also have things to look at. The TCA review could by mutual agreement be a vehicle for doing that." Labour must uome ulean over its EU intentions, leading artiule, page 27 Q&A How is Labour proposing to change the UK's Brexit deal? Sir Keir Starmer has said that he wants to review the agreement "to get a better deal". The Labour leader has ruled out rejoining the EU single market or customs union, but he feels there could be improvements. One is to extend the Trade and Co-operation Agreement to cover food safety, and animal and plant regulations, to reduce border checks. The second is to agree a limited mobility deal that would allow professionals to work or perform in the EU without needing visas from each country. Labour also wants to review the membership of the Erasmus programme, which provides funds to students to study in European countries. Why is Labour considering this? Labour believes Brexit is not the electorally toxic issue it was and could be a vote winner. Recent polling showed 53 per cent favoured closer ties with the EU. Can the Brexit deal be renegotiated? The Trade and Cooperation Agreement is up for review in 2025 but its wording is vague. It says the parties must "review" the agreement's "implementation". This does not mean the EU would not be open to discussing it with an incoming Labour government. The EU has reservations. The first is "cherry picking": allowing a non-member to have the benefits of club membership without the obligations. Without serious commitments that Britain is seeking to rejoin the single market, or the EU, there is no political momentum on the European side. The EU regards Brexit as largely settled, now the issue of Northern Ireland has been fixed. How will this play out in the election? The Tories were quick to seize on Starmer's suggestion that Labour would agree a migrant returns deal with the EU. There is a desire among some Tories to use Brexit as a campaigning issue to motivate its 2019 supporters. But there is nervousness that, in the cost of living crisis, that strategy could backfire. Graphic    In a speech Liz Truss defended the mini-budget which led to her resignation, and urged the Tory leadership to adopt bolder fiscal policies to avoid "continual stagnation"LEON NEAL/GETTY IMAGES Load-Date: September 19, 2023  End of Document
