   Challenge uniting unionism ahead   Irish Examiner January 31, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 Landmark Digital Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 547 words Byline: Emma de Souza, Comment Body   At the 11th hour, or in this case the very early hours of the morning, the North was given its first glimmer of hope. Hope, that after two years of inertia the political institutions set up under, the Belfast/Good Friday Agreement could be restored. Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) leader Jeffrey Donaldson is prepared to lead his party back to Stormont. However, while he emerged victorious from a meeting that almost tipped into a complete farce after being highjacked by a loyalist blogger, the real challenge of uniting unionism still lies ahead. Political unionism has been the dominant political power in the North since the formation of the State in 1921. That power continues to steadily diminish as society evolves and demographics change, but the ultimate disruptor to unionism has been Brexit. Following the 2016 Brexit vote, political unionism first lost its majority at Stormont, followed by Westminster, then local government, and in the most recent Assembly election - the office of first minister. The DUP was the only major party to campaign for Brexit, and subsequently courted hard brexiteer factions within the Conservative party. Brexit created a riptide within political unionism, splitting the ideology into two dominant cohorts; the Brexit purists who vehemently oppose any derogation from the rest of Britain, and those who accept some degree of divergence is necessary. As is often the case, the loudest voices are the vocal minority. Should Stormont return, the DUP will be serving alongside a nationalist first minister and a nationalist opposition leader - the Social Democratic and Labour Party's (SDLP) Matthew O'Toole. For the first time, pro-united Ireland parties will hold both the office of first minister and the role of opposition. This political reality is a physical manifestation of one of unionism's greatest looming existential threats: a United Ireland. In the days and weeks ahead, details of the deal brokered between the British government and the DUP will emerge. On the table is new legislation that reaffirms the North's place in the British internal market, and assurances of its constitutional place in Britain. Further details of the deal include a decrease in checks on goods travelling via the so-called Green lane, set up under the Windsor Agreement, and an East-West council. This should be a sellable deal to the wider unionist community, but the issue for Mr Donaldson is that he has convinced a large proportion of grassroots unionism that the party's boycott could result in the complete removal of the Northern Ireland protocol - a test he has manifestly failed to achieve. Cue claims of betrayal, followed by protest, and a possible slew of anti-protocol candidates running against the DUP at the next election. Hopes nevertheless are high powersharing will be restored within the next two weeks, but there exists a myriad of ways that it could all go wrong. The British government is selling the deal to the DUP as a change to the Windsor Framework, to the EU as no change at all, and to hardline brexiteers as a fig leaf that will not stop the rest of Britain from diverging from EU law - all three of these possibilities cannot coexist. As for political unionism, a deal may restore power-sharing, but it is unlikely to heal the divide. Load-Date: March 11, 2024  End of Document
