   Chaos erupts as pro-EU protester Steve Bray ‘wrestled out’ of Conservative Party Conference over Brexit National World October 2, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 JPIMedia Publishing Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS Length: 316 words Highlight: Pro-EU protester Steve Bray was kicked out of Conservative Party Conference after he questioned the benefits of Brexit.  Body   The subject of the EU has caused psychodrama and strife within the Tories for years - and even after Brexit, today the Conservative Party Conference saw a violent struggle. But this time the chaos that erupted wasn't internecine arguing - instead a well-known pro-EU protester was violently wrestled out of the event. Steve Bray, who is known for his long-standing protest outside parliament, was kicked out after he bellowed "what are the Brexit  benefits?" at a pro-Brexit event. There was an altercation between Bray and a member of the audience, before he was escorted out prompting the audience to yell profanities Bray walked out shouting "Brexit bulls***" in ugly scenes.  The commotion took place at a fringe meeting called Can the Tories Win? by the pro-Brexit Bruges group, with Lord Daniel Hannan, Barry Legg and Tim Congdon due to speak. Mr Bray was escorted from a meeting of the right-wing group outside the secure zone in Manchester city centre after interrupting a speaker. Wearing a blue pro-EU T-shirt, Mr Bray said: “Where are the Brexit benefits?” After briefly grappling with an audience member, he was escorted from the venue, continuing to protest and describing the attendees as “losers”. The meeting at the Friends’ Meeting House on the subject of whether the Conservatives could win the next election had been due to be addressed by party vice-chair Lee Anderson but the Ashfield MP pulled out at short notice. Bruges Group chairman Barry Legg said Anderson had been allocated another event by the Conservative Party, prompting boos from the audience. Mr Bray has staged a long-running protest against Brexit, with a weekly demonstration in Parliament Square while the House of Commons is sitting, and has come to Manchester to protest at the Conservative conference. During debates on Brexit, he was often seen and heard in the background of news broadcasts from near Parliament. Graphic    The protest was one of more than 30 events taking place in Britain – plus two in Spain – on what was dubbed a “Day for Rejoin”. Pictured here is Steve Bray. Load-Date: October 2, 2023  End of Document
