   Concessions seal Northern Ireland power-share deal The Times (London) January 31, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 957 words Byline: Oliver Wright Body   Power-sharing in Northern Ireland could return after the Democratic Unionist Party ended a two-year stand-off over the province's post-Brexit future. Chris Heaton-Harris, the Northern Ireland secretary, will announce legal changes today to reassure unionists that Northern Ireland is an integral part of the UK's single economic market, one of the DUP's key demands. At the same time Brussels will formally announce new rules allowing Northern Ireland to take greater advantage of new UK post-Brexit trade deals. Sir Jeffery Donaldson, the DUP leader, said the agreement would show that the "naysayers were wrong" and that he had secured a deal that would deliver "real change". When the package is published and formally approved by MPs, he is expected to formally re-enter powersharing, going into government as a junior partner to Sinn Fein. Sources said this was expected to happen "rapidly", with a plan for Stormont to be up and running by the end of the week. There has been no functioning government in the province since February 2022, when the DUP collapsed the executive in protest against checks on goods entering Northern Ireland from Great Britain as part of the Northern Ireland protocol. Since then the province has been run by officials with limited powers, which has meant that many public sector workers have not been given a pay rise in two years. As part of the package, ministers have agreed to pay £3.3 billion to Northern Ireland to help public services in the province. The government is also understood to have agreed to new legal commitments to underline the post-Brexit trading relationship between Britain and Northern Ireland. However, the deal will not meet unionist demands that there should be no checks at all on goods crossing between Britain and Northern Ireland as a result of Brexit. Donaldson secured his party's support for the deal after a five-hour meeting of his party's 100-strong executive on Monday night. Backing was not unanimous, with several senior figures fiercely opposed to the restoration of power-sharing. Donaldson said the package would show he had negotiated a "significant change" that would allow unfettered access to Northern Ireland for goods from Britain. "On checks, on goods moving between Great Britain and Northern Ireland and staying within the UK there will no longer be physical checks," he said. "As far as we are concerned, the green lane will be replaced by the UK internal market system that reflects the reality that Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom.. That was our core key objective and I believe what we have secured represents real change." After a call with Leo Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, Downing Street said Rishi Sunak was "confident" the deal would "pave the way for the restoration of power-sharing" in the region. "Both leaders agreed that it was in the people of Northern Ireland's interests to have stable devolved government," a spokesman said. Heaton-Harris described the DUP's move as "a welcome and significant step" after months of private negotiations. "I am pleased the DUP have agreed to accept the package of measures that the UK government has put forward, and as a result they are ready to return to the Northern Ireland assembly and nominate representatives to the Northern Ireland executive," he said. Mary Lou McDonald, president of Sinn Fein, said her party had no concerns over the deal, which she said had been reached after "painstaking" work. "We have been in close contact with both governments and with Brussels," she said. "We are satisfied that no part of the Good Friday agreement has been undermined or damaged." However, Jamie Bryson, a loyalist activist and a critic of Donaldson, said it would not live up to expectations. "Sir Jeffrey has set a high standard for himself - zero checks, zero customs paperwork on goods staying in Northern Ireland," he said. "That requires tearing up the Northern Ireland protocol and fundamentally changing the Windsor Framework." Sharing power, letters, page 28 Northern Ireland needs care at this critical moment, leading article, page 29 Analysis W hen David Trimble signed the Good Friday agreement for unionists in Northern Ireland, he won a Nobel peace prize but paid a price (Oliver Wright writes). Within a few years he was ousted by voters as first minister of Northern Ireland and his Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) was eclipsed by Ian Paisley's hardline Democratic Unionist Party, which opposed the original settlement. Trimble's fate helps to explain why Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, held out for so long before agreeing to re-enter a power-sharing deal. His fear was - and still is - that the deal will again fracture unionism and, in the long term, increase the likelihood of a united Ireland. In the short term, the final post-Brexit agreement now on the table seems good for both the DUP and Northern Ireland in general. It will result in further concessions from the EU on which incoming goods are checked and new legal assurances from Westminster about Northern Ireland's place in the union. It will also potentially reap an economic dividend. With a functioning executive Northern Ireland will be able to sell itself to business as a location with unique access to both the EU's single market and the UK. Furthermore, Westminster has pledged £3 billion in new funding for politicians in the assembly to spend. The hope is that the package will lay to rest the political tribulations of Brexit that have caused a fault line in Northern Irish politics. But Brexit has polarised the unionist community. Donaldson's fear is that his party will be squeezed in the same way the UUP was, by dividing unionism while Sinn Fein looks ever more dominant on the nationalist side. Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
