   Cornwall betrayed on funding pledge for post-Brexit era Cornish Guardian November 22, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: LETTERS; Pg. 18 Length: 597 words Body   F OR anyone that has been following the debate about Cornwall's missing European millions it will come as no surprise that the pledges made during the Brexit campaign have turned out to be meaningless. The fact that it has taken this long for it to be formally acknowledged is a disgrace that cannot be ignored. And it is not just because known liar Boris Johnson made promises to Cornwall during the 2016 referendum and throughout his shambolic reign as prime minister, but that every single Cornish MP repeated those assurances to their loyal constituents who again voted them into office. Add to the mix the very deliberate behind the scenes arm-twisting to get Cornwall Council to shift its position from at one stage demanding Westminster to deliver on its promises to becoming the mouthpiece for this Government's betrayal of Cornwall and its people and it's little wonder that politicians at all levels are viewed with suspicion and contempt in equal measure. Even the really good ones; sad but true. To be very clear Cornwall was told that should it vote to leave the European Union it would be "no worse off " funding wise after Brexit. That, at the time, equated to £100 million per year based on the fact - and this is vitally important - that the EU recognised Cornwall was one of the poorest regions in the whole of Europe. In October 2021, Mr Johnson again said that the Government will fully "replicate" the EU funding lost by Cornwall as a result of Brexit, adding that he would ensure that "Cornwall would be carved a discreet fund from the Shared Prosperity Fund". That like-for-like funding has never materialised, despite repeated efforts from the Conservatives in charge at New County Hall or their MP colleagues to tell us otherwise. It's as if they really believe we are stupid and incapable of following the money - or lack of it - to hit the magic £100m mark that Cornwall was promised. As we report today, the cash Cornwall Council gets from the Government to replace EU grants following Brexit will run out in a month...and not 2025 as previously believed. What's more is that the actual funding that Cornwall has received to date from central Government post-Brexit has been around £43m a year - a gigantic £57m shortfall from the £100m a year it received from the EU. Alarmingly while fingers are collectively pointed in all directions but themselves, Conservative-led County Hall has still had no confirmation from Westminster whether payments from the Shared Prosperity Fund would continue after 2025. As of last month Cornwall Council's £137.6m Good Growth programme had received 1,395 expressions of interest, resulting in 461 applications requesting £375m - almost three times the sum on offer. To date 127 projects, worth £127.5m, have been approved. We are told that the council expects all the Good Growth money to be committed, and funding approved for specific projects, by the end of this year. But that still means that more than £230m of Shared Prosperity Fund requests will not be met, though they may have been rejected for reasons other than a lack of money. This disastrous scenario has been hurtling down the line since the 2016 referendum and we now find ourselves at crisis point through arrogance, incompetence and denial. The only person that can fix this enormous mess and honour the pledge made by his talk-is-cheap predecessor is Prime Minister Rishi Sunak. Cornwall's stark economic health has not improved since leaving the EU and it's now about to get a heck of a lot worse. So we have very little choice but to say: "Give us our money, Rishi." Load-Date: November 22, 2023  End of Document
