   Council is guilt tripping on crossing patrollers Aberdeen Press and Journal March 14, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 26 Length: 1219 words Byline: Iain Fleming Body   Sir, - I went round to collect my two daughters at Peterhead Academy on budget day. I think it would be fair to say they were not exactly praising Aberdeenshire Council for the utter folly of getting rid of school crossing patrollers. While, as folk at Aberdeenshire Council will point out to you, it is my responsibility to get my children, it is a pity the views of children are missed out. It is my younger daughter who will have to cross West Road without any help from a school crossing patroller, other youngsters who will have to cross Balmoor Terrace, King Street and the like and that is just for Peterhead Academy. What about Peterhead Central school and Dales Park school and Meethill? While I get it that they don't want my vote as an independence supporter, one thing that just sticks in my throat is when you hear retired Liberal Democrat councillor Anne Simpson telling me of my responsibilities as a parent. What about the fact that the council has deliberately chosen to get rid of a method to get my child to school safely? Is it not the way the Conservatives, as shown by the pandemic, shove the responsibility and risk on to parents and will quite happily guilt trip parents to save a bit of cash? I happen to be the only car driver in the family and think it quite irresponsible for the council to guilt trip parents like myself who sometimes actually hsve to work away from Peterhead. What risk assessment did they carry out before making the blanket decision to get rid of school crossing patrollers? Peter Ovenstone, Orchard Grove, Peterhead. UK economy is not on the skids Sir, - A small group of Press and Journal correspondents persist in telling your columns that the UK economy is on the skids. Brexit was a prelude to poverty, the UK economy will fall apart any day now and we should head for the (Scottish) hills of independence while we still can. Amazing stuff! Post Brexit, Covid and global economic slowdown, the apocalyptic visionaries, who refuse to believe official government figures, also ignored The Press and Journal of March 4 which set out the financial league for them to study. The pound has strengthened from a year ago to 21 out of 25 currencies. The pound stands at a 3.8% increase against the euro, the dollar at 3.5% ... and even much cited Norway at 5.8%. Not to disappoint those who expected something on "ferries" I should mention Turkey which has suffered an economic crisis; causing a collapse of the lira (72%). Now perhaps we might be able to pay for the Sannox and Rosa in Turkish lira or will they demand pounds/dollars? Sam Coull, Lendrum Terrace, Peterhead. Time to get Brexit done and dusted Sir, - It's telling, when eight years after the 2016 Brexit referendum, the UK is finding it impossible to leave the EU. Brussels has lots of previous, and is out to keep control of UK laws, borders, hefty annual fees, fishing grounds and all other resources - and will continue to bombard us with claptrap, migrant boats, trading obstacles and all the rest - until Brexit has been reversed. Brussels ought to start respecting democratic votes, and their deluded foot soldiers here in Scotland confront reality - the failures of our SNP government who are obsessed with the reckless squandering of taxpayers' money bribing the public for votes. Savvy Scots will not fall for the Venezuela-style hand out grovelling politics of the Scottish No-plan Party, and are fully aware that there is nothing "Independent" about being ruled and dictated to by Brussels. After eight years of capitulation, its time for the UK to unshackle from the self-serving rules and regulations of the plundering EU - to get Brexit finally done and dusted. George Emslie, Aberdeen. Columnist Chris Deerin is a BritNat Sir, - Your column writer Chris Deerin (Opinion Feb 4) is a Nat. There it is. The pejorative name he uses to describe the SNP and Indy supporters (more than 50% of the population) is a perfect description for his British Nationalist position. The man who professes to aspire to impartial journalism but who in 2015 encouraged tactical voting to defeat "separatists". Labour Party member Deerin says that complaints about the connivance between the Speaker and Starmer and the subsequent sidelining of SNP representatives are somehow a game. He's got a point but only because there appears to be little serious value in sending MPs to Westminster to have them overruled again and again. Mr Deerin, I can assure you there is indeed anger and it won't go away until Scotland is an independent country running its own affairs. So instead of patronising BritNat peeves about chippiness, consider instead that your bitter narrative about the adoption of Labour's former socially just policies by the SNP were only possible because Labour abandoned them and abandoned Scots. If the Labour emperor had no clothes in the last two decades, you should be glad that the SNP picked them up. That is, if your motives are for the improvement of working people's lives rather than the dominance of an outdated and right wing unionist party. Peter E Smith, Beauly. Vagaries of wind, water and sun Sir, - How could any chancellor have produced a budget for growth, when plentiful and reliable energy - the very fuel of economic success - has been legislated out of existence by green policies. Britain is now incapable of industrial growth, with its attendant prosperity, having closed traditional and reliable sources of fossil and nuclear power, in exchange for dependence on the vagaries of wind, water and sun. We must abandon these meaningless economic forecasts in favour of long-term weather reports, which are now much more relevant to our future growth. Malcolm Parkin, Kinross. Who benefits from wind generation? Sir, - Following scandals including the Post Office, PPE and sewage, it is surprising that people are still unquestioningly accepting what they are told by corporates and government. We object to proposed infrastructure developments precisely because we want to leave our children a world where we have done everything we can about climate change, but in a way that bequeaths them a country unspoiled by the rapacious drive to maximise shareholder dividend. What we oppose is the thoughtlessness of these developments. When countries across Europe are undergrounding or offshoring new infrastructure, SSEN choose to erect 68-metre-tall pylons every 250 metres, next to homes and schools. Pylons made from steel made in blast furnaces and transported around the world. New challenge, old technology. They cite cost - modern solutions would add around £3.50 annually to the bills of consumers. We oppose a solution that ignores research showing our children are more likely to develop leukaemia if they live near overhead lines. By 2030 Scotland's peak demand for electricity will be 9GW. Our capacity to generate will be 43GW. Our government already pays wind farms £300m a year not to produce electricity. Who benefits? The shareholders of electricity companies. Not the people of Scotland. Objectors are simply asking the questions that so far go unanswered. Hiding behind "climate change/net zero" has been good enough up to now. No longer, we need to see their workings. They have to do better. Corporates and government have forfeited the right to be taken at face value. Steve Allen, Quiddiesmill Croft, Drumoak. Load-Date: March 14, 2024  End of Document
