   David Cameron, the father of Brexit, returns to Downing Street CE Noticias Financieras English November 13, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 556 words Body   David Cameron's favorite film is "The Man Who Killed Liberty Valance", but if his political career were a film, it would not be a western but a horror film: "The Man Who Killed the UK's Relationship with Europe". The former Prime Minister, now the protagonist of a surprising return to the forefront of British politics, has inevitably gone down in history as the father of Brexit, for calling the referendum that led to the country's exit from the European Union. That is not, in any case, the epitaph that Cameron would have wanted for a tomb from which he has now risen, like Lazarus, albeit in a secondary role. In his dreams he would have been remembered as a young, modern, pragmatic and progressive leader, who moderated the Conservative Party, removed its toxicity and promoted legislation to normalize civil unions between homosexuals. But it is well known that history is written with crooked lines, and the financial crisis and Brexit got in the way. A conciliator by nature, he called two referendums, the Scottish referendum and the Brexit referendum. He was successful in the first one, but made a miscalculation in the second one. A conciliator by nature, the former premier called two referendums, first the Scottish referendum (to try to put an end to pro-independence demands north of the border) and then the Brexit referendum (to quell the permanent rebellion of the Eurosceptic wing of his party). With the sovereignty consultation, he got a good scare (even the Queen had to intervene), but Unionism eventually came out of it with flying colors. But with the exit from Europe it made a miscalculation and made a bland campaign for remaining in the EU, making it easier for Great Britain to shoot itself in the foot from which it is still convalescing. Despite his privileged origins (he went to Eton and Oxford, is a descendant of William IV and a distant relative of Queen Elizabeth), he campaigned for prime minister as a supporter of strong social investment and a friend of young people with integration problems, even allowing himself to be photographed wearing a tracksuit and a hoodie in gestures of solidarity. He has never lacked money but has always wanted more, and after leaving Downing Street he was involved in a scandal for lobbying government ministers for the granting of funds to a financial company to which he had been linked and which had paid him ten million euros for his services. The 2008 crisis did him a favor by discrediting Gordon Brown's Labour administration and facilitating his arrival in government two years later at the head of a coalition with Nick Clegg's Liberals. But it also took its toll because it prompted him to change course economically, to be much less progressive than he had promised and to become the apostle of austerity and cuts that still last, have pushed the seams of the country's social fabric to the limit and destroyed public services. David Cameron led the Conservative Party for eleven years, more than anyone after Winston Churchill, Margaret Thatcher and Sir Alec Baldwin, and left his mark, even if it was not the one he would have liked. After seven years in the shadows, "the man who brought about Brexit" has returned in a sequel to the film, to lend a hand to Rishi Sunak and save what can be saved from the predictable sinking of the Conservative ship. Load-Date: November 14, 2023  End of Document
