   Don't go any further over Brexit, Labour leader told i-news September 23, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 816 words Byline: Arj Singh Body   Sir Keir Starmer has had a big week. But while it began with the Labour leader strutting the world stage it ended with him having to fend off Conservative attacks, insisting he was not in favour of rejoining the EU. Comments he says have been misunderstood led to a national front page claiming Sir Keir was planning a Brexit betrayal and the leader facing internal warnings about going too far. The controversy came from footage of Sir Keir during his globetrotting tour when he insisted "we don't want to diverge" from EU rules at a summit in Montreal. He says he was simply stating that a Labour government would not water down standards in areas such as food safety or workers' rights. But the Tories seized on the comments with the Chancellor Jeremy Hunt claiming they would "worry a lot of people that what he really wants to do is to unpick Brexit". There has also been concern from within Labour's own ranks. One MP said Leave voters would "understand" Sir Keir's desire to co-operate with Europe on small boats, and to seek a better Brexit deal, but warned that any further move closer to the EU could become damaging. The MP said: "It's OK as long as it's taking us to a point after which we're not going to go any further. "I wouldn't want to see it going any further - we have gone as far as we can go before people say: 'Hang on a minute, is there something at play here'." Yesterday Sir Keir and the shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves were trying to dampen any controversy insisting the UK was "not going to be rule takers" as far as Brussels was concerned. But there is a feeling at the top of the party that Tory attacks are an inevitable consequence of Sir Keir answering questions about where he stands on key issues, and that there is now a willingness to take the fight to the Tories on areas of traditional weakness. The week began with diplomacy in the Netherlands, Canada and France - where Sir Keir unveiled his plan to tackle the Channel small boats. It includes ditching the Rwanda plan and negotiation an EU returns agreement, as well a desire to rework the Brexit trade deal to bring the UK closer to Brussels. The Tories reacted by claiming Sir Keir's asylum plan would lead to 100,000 migrants being "dumped on" UK shores by the EU. But a Shadow Cabinet source said "We were expecting a Tory attack", and Labour aides and MPs view the policy announcement as a success. They also point out that the Tories are not on comfortable ground when it comes to the UK's relationship with the EU. The Shadow Cabinet source also noted the Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch's decision to scrap a planned bonfire of EU laws at the end of the year. "We have been out of the EU for the best part of four years and the Government has taken the choice not to diverge from some of the regulations in place," they said. Labour's new-found confidence on the EU is probably born out of a string of opinion polls suggesting voters believe Brexit is going badly. Anand Menon, director of the UK in a Changing Europe thinktank, suggested Sir Keir would not suffer for suggesting Britain should have a closer EU relationship in a way that he might have in 2019 when the Brexit debate was at its most polarised. Professor Menon suggested that any internal disquiet over the tonal shift would be limited, adding: "The electoral risk of this is overdone, 70 per cent of Labour voters are pro-Remain and voters have stopped caring about Brexit. "There is a massive proportion of voters including Leave voters who think Brexit is going badly, so the notion the Conservatives can weaponise this by saying Keir Starmer is going to mess up Brexit is for the birds because voters think the Tories have messed it up already. "It's also not a salient issue, with just 9 per cent of voters viewing Brexit as the most important issue facing Britain (according to Ipsos MORI). He's on safe ground here as far as things stand." Labour sources say they are also relaxed about Mr Sunak attempting to turn net zero into an election issue by delaying the 2030 ban on petrol and diesel vehicles to 2035 - a move the shadow Energy Secretary Ed Miliband pledged to reverse in government. The Tories have been widely seen to be attempting to repeat their success in the Uxbridge by-election, in which the party held on to Boris Johnson's old seat after highlighting the impact of the London Mayor Sadiq Khan's ultra-low emissions zone for cars (Ulez). But one Shadow Cabinet minister warned it was a mistake as it has alienated the car industry. "They've made a gigantic presumptive leap from the one by-election where the policy was immediate," they said. "By the time we get to 2030 new EVs should be cheaper than ICE [petrol and diesel vehicles]. We think the salience of this is low amongst voters. The majority of people never buy a brand new car." Just 9 per cent of voters currently view Brexit as the most important issue facing Britain Load-Date: September 23, 2023  End of Document
