   Don’t put too much weight on recession, says Bailey telegraph.co.uk February 12, 2024 Monday 7:04 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Version:8 Length: 879 words Byline: By Tim Wallace Highlight: The Governor of the Bank of England said he was not overly concerned about a downturn Body   Andrew Bailey has cautioned against putting “too much weight” on Britain entering recession ahead of data expected to show the economy has contracted for two quarters in a row. The Governor of the Bank of England said he was not overly concerned about a downturn as he argued that it was likely to be shallow and short-lived. Analysts expect official data on Thursday to show the economy shrank by 0.1pc in the final quarter of 2023. It would mark the second consecutive contraction, meaning the UK has fallen into a recession for the first time since the start of the pandemic. Confirmation of a protracted economic slump will present a challenging backdrop for Rishi Sunak and the Conservatives in the Wellingborough and Kingswood by-elections. Voters go to the polls on the same day as the GDP data is published. However, Mr Bailey said that whether or not the country tipped into a formal recession last year was less important than the future path for the economy. He told students at Loughborough University: “I wouldn’t put too much weight on that. If we do get two successive negative quarters-and we don’t know-it will be very shallow. “What I would put more weight on is that the indicators we have seen since then have shown some signs of upturn. There is still a long way to go, but we are beginning to see signs of an upturn.” Mr Bailey added: “In the forecasts we published two weeks ago we have a somewhat stronger projection for growth going forwards so I would put more weight on that frankly than where we ended up last year, because whichever way it goes it will be very shallow.” The Bank chief acknowledged that interest rates, at 5.25pc, were a drag on the economy and said this was a “deliberate” attempt to tackle inflation. However, he said that weak investment and productivity growth were also constraining growth in the economy’s supply capacity. This can keep inflation high and is likely to make the Bank of England cautious before it commits to cutting borrowing costs, Mr Bailey suggested. The comments came as analysts at Goldman Sachs claimed Britain’s economy was 5pc smaller than it would have been without Brexit and leaving the EU had made the inflation crisis worse. Economists James Moberly and Sven Jari Stehn at the US investment bank argued that Britain was suffering “a significant long-run output cost of Brexit” in a note sent to investors. Trade, migration and business investment have all taken a hit since the referendum on EU membership in ways which have held back GDP growth, they argued. The analysts wrote: “The UK economy has notably underperformed other advanced economies since the EU referendum in June 2016. “UK real GDP per capita has barely risen above pre-Covid levels and now stands 4pc above the mid-2016 level. This compares with 8pc for the eurozone and 15pc for the US.” The economists said comparison to a model of a “Doppelganger” Britain that had remained in the EU suggested that the economy was now 5pc smaller than it otherwise would have been had it remained in the bloc. Goldman Sachs said the cost of living had also jumped by 31pc in the UK since the vote to leave the EU. This is worse than the 27pc increase seen over the same period in the US and the 24pc rise in the eurozone. Mr Moberly and Mr Jari Stehn acknowledged “significant uncertainty” over their estimates, putting the potential range of the hit to GDP at between 4pc and 8pc. The pair also noted that in some areas, such as trade in services, the economy has performed better than expected. Other economists said Goldman Sachs had exaggerated the impact of leaving the EU and ignored the impact of other changes since the referendum, such as rising interest rates, Covid and the energy crisis. Jonathan Portes, professor at King’s College London and senior fellow at the think tank UK in a Changing Europe, said the true impact of Brexit was more likely in the region of 2pc to 3pc of GDP. The Institute of Economics Affairs argued the inflation crisis was worse in Britain because the Bank of England over-stimulated the economy with low interest rates, not because of Brexit. Julian Jessop, fellow at the IEA, said the analysis “ignores many other factors that may also have changed, including the different impacts of shocks such as Covid and the energy crisis, and the different policy responses in individual countries.” He added: “These models also assume that any hit from Brexit is permanent and irreversible. Investment in particular should continue to recover as uncertainty clears. “Exports and imports should also pick up again as businesses adjust and as new trade deals come online.” Goldman Sachs’ Brexit forecasts have in the past proved misguided. The bank predicted the UK would fall into a recession if it left the EU at the time of the referendum, a fate which the economy ultimately avoided. A Treasury spokesman said: “The UK has grown faster than Germany since leaving the EU and the IMF has said our medium term growth outlook is brighter than many of our neighbours on the continent, including France and Germany. “The government is making the most of Brexit freedoms to grow the economy, including repealing financial services law inherited from the EU so we can unlock reforms with the potential for £100bn in investment over ten years.” Load-Date: February 12, 2024  End of Document
