   Dugdale comes clean. Yes she did vote for the SNP; WARNING OVER LABOUR VOTE Scottish Express February 6, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 16 Length: 564 words Byline: David Walker Body   FORMER Scottish Labour chief Kezia Dugdale has admitted voting for the SNP. Ms Dugdale, who is married to SNP Education Secretary Jenny Gilruth, said she ticked the box for the SNP in 2019 because she was "so mad about Brexit". Her revelation was welcomed by Humza Yousaf but led to stark criticism from the Scottish Tories who said this showed that Labour could not be trusted to protect the Union. There have been rumours about Ms Dugdale's allegiances ever since she stepped down as a politician, fuelled by public comments that seemed sympathetic to her former rivals. Ms Dugdale has previously said her support for the UK has waned since she played a key role in the Better Together campaign in the 2014 independence referendum. She succeeded Jim Murphy as Scottish Labour leader but led the party to third place in the Holyrood elections and Westminster vote before stepping down and going on reality show I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!. Now, in a BBC Radio 4 documentary, she revealed that she voted for the SNP to protest at Britain leaving the EU. She said: "I voted SNP once in my life and that was in the European Union elections immediately after Brexit, where I was so mad about Brexit, I wanted to register a vote for them.And for that reason alone. "I felt I could vote for the SNP in that European Union election because that in no way could be construed as a vote for independence. I felt that that was a safe thing to do. I voted Labour in every election since then, from the council to the Scottish parliament to the general election." The European Parliament elections were held in May 2019, with the UK already heading out of the EU after the Brexit vote. Ms Dugdale was still a Labour MSP at the time and her party lost both its Euro seats and took just 9.3% of the vote. She left the Scottish Parliament in July 2019 to take up the role of director at the John Smith Institute at Glasgow University. She has also featured frequently in the media, sticking up for the legacy of Nicola Sturgeon and refusing to say how she would vote in a second independence referendum because there would not be a poll any time soon. Ms Dugdale said: "If you are presented with a binary choice between an independent Scotland in a progressive Europe or Little Boris Brexit Britain, I know where my cards would fall down. I also know I couldn't argue with the same strength for the Union that I did in 2014 now. "That doesn't mean I'm ready to vote 'yes'. "There are big, big questions we need to debate as a country and resolve. We have to keep talking about some of these big issues in the country, but not just purely through thatYes-No lens." Her comments were slated by ScottishTory MSPs. Jamie Halcro Johnston said: "Your regular reminder that you can't trust Labour with the Union." Fellow MSP Roz McCall added: "Labour cannot be trusted to stand up for the union. Only the ScotTories will always oppose indyref2." Ms Dugdale made the admission about voting SNP in a documentary called Labour's Scottish challenge, aired last night on BBC Radio 4. Scottish Labour leader Anas Sarwar told the programme: "The tipping point in Scotland is around 35%. If we get around 35% in the polls then we are in competition to beat the SNP. tol 3 compet anw "If I said that to anybody two and a bit years ago, they would have thought I was deluded. "But I have always believed that's what we can do." Graphic    Kezia Dugdale was maddened by BrexitCritic... Tory Jamie Halcro Johnston Load-Date: February 6, 2024  End of Document
