   DUP's rivals are not Sinn Féin, but are from the unionist side Sunday Independent February 4, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 21 Length: 830 words Byline: Eoin O'Malley Body   Myths are created in real time. As Brexit gets blamed for every ill that befalls the UK, the more recent problems of the Stormont Assembly are also blamed on Brexit. And certainly, the proximate cause of the suspension of Stormont related to problems imposed by Brexit. The need for an Irish Sea border is imposed by the type of Brexit that the UK Tory party demanded of itself. The Government here hasn't helped. It takes the view that the Irish Sea is already there, so any additional border is hardly a real imposition. Anything that says otherwise is just pandering to pointless political rhetoric. But the Government could hardly be surprised that placing checks at the ports would cause problems for unionists. Irish politicians had been dragging their European counterparts along the Border to protest against even invisible checks taking place. The latest settlement doesn't remove the Irish Sea border. It cannot. What is different is that Rishi Sunak appears to be a serious politician who is making a genuine attempt to solve the problem. He's not helped by Sinn Féin's "within touching distance of a united Ireland" comments, or the Irish government taking the UK to court over the Troubles amnesty. But if we think that without Brexit the story of Stormont would be one of happy politicians holding hands and working together, we have forgotten that Sinn Féin's withdrawal from Stormont in 2017 had nothing to do with Brexit, and much to do with party competition with the SDLP. Ditto the party's refusal to work past the UK welfare reforms in 2015. As we celebrate the return of the Stormont executive, we would be foolish to believe that Northern Ireland's problems are in the past. The architecture of the Good Friday Agreement demands continuous, simultaneous consent among the leading parties from both traditions. The need to get the DUP and Sinn Féin to agree is a high enough bar - but these two parties are not really in competition with each other. They are primarily in competition with the other parties from their tradition. This internal political competition within unionism and nationalism has cursed the Northern Ireland Assembly, even well before its inception. When Jeffrey Donaldson announced he was willing to accept an agreement with the UK government, he was probably looking over his shoulder, wondering DUP leader Jeffrey who would shout "Lundy!" first. Donaldson himself was once that heckler. Throughout history, there has been a steady stream of unionist leaders who were either instinctive moderates taken down by extremists outflanking them, or else were hardliners grown secure enough to make a compromise. Today, Donaldson is the hardliner making the compromise. One hundred years ago it was James Craig who was the hardliner accepting the compromise of partition and devolution - even though he would have preferred the union of the whole island within the United Kingdom. In the century since then, unionist leaders have frequently tried to compromise - only to be taken down by hardliners. Terence O'Neill's rapprochement with Dublin in the 1960s was opposed by hardline unionists, splitting Donaldson his party. Fifty years ago Brian Faulkner went much further, agreeing to the formation of an assembly that offered to do much of what the current Assembly does. His party split. He was labelled a Lundy by his hardline successor Harry West. David Trimble of the UUP reached his historic compromise on the Good Friday Agreement in 1998. He himself had once been seen as a hardliner - but he lost support and many former followers, such as Donaldson, defected to the DUP. Donaldson accompanied archetypal hardliner Ian Paisley into government with Sinn Féin - but another split ensued, with Jim Allister setting up Traditional Unionist Voice. The good news is that the splits are getting smaller. Though with as much as 40pc of the DUP executive opposed to Donaldson's compromise, another split seems likely. The protesters outside the DUP executive meeting last Monday night held up posters that wouldn't have looked out of place in 1985, when Garret FitzGerald and Margaret Thatcher sat down to sign the Anglo-Irish Agreement. Back then, unionism refused to compromise - but Thatcher stood firm. In 1974, the problem for the Sunningdale Agreement was that the UK government under Harold Wilson caved in to loyalist pressure. The key to what is happening now is the UK government. Sunak has gone as far as he can. The unionist leadership recognise this - even hardliners such as Sammy Wilson and Nigel Dodds. They know a Labour government in Britain would be even less sympathetic to unionist demands. Add to this Sinn Féin's need to be seen to make something work, and the Northern Ireland institutions might be about to enter a short-lived golden age. And then an election might knock it off course. Eoin O'Malley is associate professor in politics at Dublin City University Š Letters, page 29; Shane Ross: A long gestation and pushy parents, back page Load-Date: February 4, 2024  End of Document
