   ECB plan to avoid "empty shells" after Brexit enters new phase CE Noticias Financieras English November 15, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 302 words Body   The European Central Bank plans to deepen its scrutiny of whether euro zone banking centers created in response to Brexit rely too heavily on London for services such as mergers and acquisitions and stock and bond issuance. Before the Brexit, global banks had used London as their base in the European Union, but the U.K.'s goodbye forced them to open or increase their operations in the bloc, creating tensions between the ECB and the Bank of England over staff relocations. The Brexit has led to the transfer of some 7,000 financial sector jobs from London to the EU, increasing pressure on the UK to reform financial rules to keep the City globally competitive. The ECB, which oversees large banks located in the eurozone, made clear on Wednesday that its 2020 Desk Mapping Review (DMR), in which it checked whether those centers were "empty shells" relying on London-based services, was not a one-off. "Other Brexit-related activities complementing the DMR include (...) conducting a supervisory review of the remaining corporate and investment banking activities that were not covered by the DMR (mergers and acquisitions, equity capital markets, debt capital markets, leveraged finance)," it said. The ECB said it had identified 264 trading desks in its mapping exercise, representing (EURO)91 billion (US$99 billion) of risk-weighted assets (RWA), and (EURO)4 billion of net trading income. It is now assessing comments from Brexit centers on the review before setting mandatory requirements on sufficient senior staffing, giving banks 18 months to comply. According to the ECB, the 56 "significant" trading desks identified are to be run entirely locally from the EU or with "significantly strengthened local capabilities." The total number of senior traders is expected to increase by 132 to 306. source: Reuters Load-Date: November 16, 2023  End of Document
