   EU didn't believe Johnson's 'madman' Brexit deal bluff Irish Independent November 21, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 354 words Byline: ADAM FORREST Body   European Union negotiators did not believe Boris Johnson's bluff that he was prepared to pull the UK out of the bloc with a "no deal" Brexit, Michel Barnier has revealed. The EU's former Brexit negotiator has said he knew the former UK prime minister was not serious about his "madman" claim to be ready to exit without a trade agreement with Brussels. In scathing comments, Mr Barnier also said Mr Johnson's ministers "did not know" or understand the consequences of Brexit. "From the very first day, the UK ministers not only underestimated the consequences of Brexit - they did not know the consequences of Brexit," Mr Barnier said. The ex-negotiator criticised then UK prime minister Theresa May for ruling out any membership to the single market or customs union from the outset, and said Mr Johnson made "a huge mistake" by imposing deadlines on Brexit. "He had no time." Mr Barnier revealed that he believed Ms May when she warned of a potential no-deal Brexit, but did not believe her successor as he tried to up the ante with threats to crash the country out of the EU without any deal. "Johnson said once, 'I want a deal because I need a deal.' This sentence was key for me," he said on the former Tory leader's bluff - known as the "madman theory", when a negotiator attempts to suggest he is capable of anything. Mr Barnier added: "I wasn't surprised by the madman strategy. I was told that this strategy was taught in university in the UK." The former negotiator also ridiculed UK government attempts to "divide" EU countries in a bid to weaken the European Commission's hand during talks. "The British did not understand. They tried every week to divide us. I visited one capital every week: the day before I came, there was a British minister, and the day after. Which is incredible," he added. The former French cabinet minister added he was enthusiastic about the possibility of a Labour government. He said Labour leader Keir Starmer's plan for a new UK-EU veterinary standards agreement to ease costly trade checks of food and agricultural products "seems to be pragmatic and possible". (© Independent News Service) Load-Date: November 21, 2023  End of Document
