   Eurozone unemployment falls to record low; US GDP growth revised down – as it happened The Guardian (London) May 30, 2024 Thursday 7:37 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Version:14 Length: 5962 words Byline: Graeme Wearden Highlight: BCC calls for improved relations with the EU to cut the costs for business, while sticky inflation worries markets Body   block-time published-time 3.10pm BST   Closing post   Time to recap The US economy grew at a slower pace in the first quarter than initially reported, as consumer spending slowed.  US GDP rose at an annualized pace of 1.3% in January-March, below the previous estimate of 1.6%, fresh Bureau of Economic Analysis data shows. The data shows America’s economy had less momentum than expected at the start of the year. But in Europe, the jobs market remains solid. Eurozone unemployment fell to a new alltime low last month, at 6.4%.  In the UK, the British Chambers of Commerce is urging the next government to make improving relations  with the European Union a key part of its drive to revive the economy. In the financial markets, the FTSE 100 has shrugged off fears over sticky inflation , and is up 46 points or 0.55% in afternoon trading. But in New York, Wall Street is being held back by a 19% slump in Salesforce’s shares  after it missed analyst forecasts last night.  Related:  Next UK government should introduce scams legislation, says City lobby group  Related:  Dr Martens will cut up to £25m in costs to counter weak US sales  Related:  Why policymakers are more likely to risk high inflation during periods of economic uncertainty | Kenneth Rogoff  Related:  Call for UK crackdown on plastic packaging to drive green economy block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.11pm BST block-time published-time 3.02pm BST   Over on Wall Street, shares in enterprise software maker Salesforce have plunged by 19% after it disappointed analysts last night.   Salesforce reported revenues of $9.13bn for the first quarter of this year, below forecasts of $9.15bn. It also predicted that second quarter revenue would be between $9.2bn and $9.25bn, below analyst forecasts of $9.35bn. enltrSalesforce drops on first-ever single-digit sales growth outlook https://t.co/MULXjJQE2J ?? $CRM  -19.60% pic.twitter.com/OEwucRbLQH  — Yahoo Finance (@YahooFinance) May 30, 2024 Analysts at Saxo say: [Salesforce’s] revenue outlook came in lower-than-expected highlighting that the current demand for AI workloads is not currently translating into higher revenue growth for Salesforce. block-time published-time 2.39pm BST   Top brass at Burberry have paid the price for a disappointing year for the luxury goods maker.  Burberry’s annual report, released, today, shows that chief executive Jonathan Akeroyd had not earned a bonus for last year. This pulled Akeroyd’s total pay for the year to 31 March 2024 down to £1.3m, from £4.3m the previous 12 months (when he had received a £1.3m bonus and £1.7m to buy him out of bonus and share awards for leaving his position as boss of rival Versace).  Related:  Burberry appoints Versace boss as CEO with £6m ‘golden hello’  Danuta Gray, chair of Burberry’s Remuneration Committee, explains: The Committee judged that progress was made on refining our brand image, evolving our product and strengthening distribution, resulting in some of the strategic objectives being partially met. However, in light of the business performance and broader shareholder experience, the Committee and Jonathan Akeroyd agreed that it would not be appropriate for him to receive an annual bonus for FY 2023/24.  CFO Kate Ferry would receive an annual bonus for FY 2023/24 of £121,500, representing 9% of her maximum bonus. Burberry’s profits fell by 40% last year  ; in the last 12 months, its share price has halved. block-time published-time 2.09pm BST   US jobless claims inch up   The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefits has risen slightly, but still remains low on historical terms. There were 219,000 fresh ‘initial claims’ for jobless support last week, an increase of 3,000. The initial claims data is a proxy for the number of workers laid off by US companies and has been low in recent years as firms have held onto labo(u)r. enltrUS new weekly unemployment claims last week were 219,000. That was +3,000 WoW. pic.twitter.com/a3yko0DCVF  — RonH (@Ronhl9) May 30, 2024 block-time published-time 1.45pm BST  Today’s US GDP report also shows that disposable personal income by 5.3% in the first quarter Inflation took quite a bite out of that increase; real disposable personal income increased 1.9%. Both figures have been revised higher. block-time published-time 1.43pm BST   US GDP growth revised down as consumer spending slows    Newsflash: The US economy grew more slowly than first thought at the start of this year.  US GDP increased at an annualized rate of 1.3 percent in the first quarter of 2024, according to the second estimate of gross domestic product, just released. That’s the equivalent of quarterly growth just over 0.3%. enltr??Breaking! US GDP Growth Revised Lower: The US economy expanded at an annualized rate of 1.3% in Q1 2024, down from the initial estimate of 1.6%, and significantly lower than the 3.4% growth recorded in Q4 2023. #MM pic.twitter.com/0DTVOvVBT2  — MacroMicro (@MacroMicroMe) May 30, 2024 Previousl, the Bureau of Economic Analysis had estimated that GDP rose at an annualized rate of 1.6% , or 0.4% quarter-on-quarter, which was already the weakest rate in almost two years. Today’s update primarily reflected a downward revision to consumer spending, says the BEA. enltrThe U.S. economy grew at a 1.3% annualized rate in Q1, down from the 1.6% rate estimated a month ago. https://t.co/qHGf5n47pp #GDP  — BEA News (@BEA_News) May 30, 2024 Today’s report shows that consumer spending, exports, and state and local government spending all decelerated in the January-March quarter; a downturn in federal government spending also weighed on growth. But, this was partly offset by an acceleration in residential fixed investment. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.52pm BST block-time published-time 12.43pm BST   Speaking of fiscal rules (see previous post), Oxford economics professor Sir Dieter Helm last week published a very interesting blog post  about the fiscal rules, looking at how both parties are pledging to be responsible.  But, he warns, this involves the “fudge” of relabelling capital maintenance as investment. Prof Helm writes  : Both claim that the days of having the cake of tax reductions and the cake of higher spending are over. Tax cuts will mean spending cuts and spending increases will mean higher taxes. No more Jeremy Corbyn, Boris Johnson and Liz Truss. The sinners have apparently repented. Confronted by the promise of a miracle, here are several possible responses. The first is simply to believe them. The sinners have repented. “Oh Lord, I promise to be a good and a trustworthy steward of state finances. I won’t sin, I promise, even if I/my Party has repeatedly done so in the past. This time will be different, here are my fiscal rules and I promise to stick to them.” The second is to assume that, when the inevitable expenditure pressures become irresistible, taxes are going to go up. The pressures on health spending, more defence, net zero, and workers’ rights in the public sector will simply overwhelm the next government, and possibly as early as spring 2025. Tax cuts will prove unsustainable. Tax increases will be inevitable. The third is to assume that more borrowing will be resorted to, and that it will be the bond markets that bite back, imposing ex post discipline in response to ex ante breaking the new rules. The trick will be to continue pretending that current spending can be relabelled as “investment”. enltrFiscal rules are a good idea in a country struggling to meets its private and public means. The rules set out by the Conservatives and Labour are, however, less than they seem. My latest "Fiscal rules – the cakeism approach" is now available ( https://t.co/EWpBq6rcfO  ). pic.twitter.com/IFHRPkhars  — Prof Dieter Helm CBE (@Dieter_Helm) May 21, 2024 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.48pm BST block-time published-time 12.42pm BST   NIESR: Fiscal rules must be reformed    The next government must revise the fiscal framework in order to raise living standards and unlock spending on health, infrastructure and housing, according to the National Institute of Economic and Social Research.  In January, Keir Starmer ruled out breaking Labour’s fiscal rules to meet its green investment targets if it wins the election.  But the current rules are arbitrary, NIESR said, and must be broken or redesigned if the government’s aim is higher growth and higher living standards. The UK fiscal framework was set up with the aim of making public debt sustainable, in other words to ensure that the government is borrowing at a level that means it can meet its payment obligations while having the room to respond to economic shocks. The current framework states that the debt-to-GDP ratio should be falling in the fifth year of forecasts by the Office for Budget Responsibility, and that net government borrowing should not exceed 3% of GDP. NIESR said that such fiscal targets are arbitrary. The Institute for Government has said that successive governments have gamed the fiscal rules , by claiming to be adhering to fiscal discipline while announcing short term giveaways and longer term tax rises or spending cuts that never materialise. Many long-term public investment projects do not make returns within five years, NIESR said, which stymies public investment that could help improve the debt to GDP ratio. To revitalise the economy, NIESR is proposing three pillars of fiscal policy reform.  First, including the net worth of the public sector as a target, which provides a broader measure of the sustainability of public debt. Second, discounting public infrastructure investment from the deficit measure, separating it out from day-to-day spending. Third, the government could establish fixed dates for fiscal events like the budget, in the same way that interest rates are decided by the monetary policy committee at set dates in the calendar. This would insulate budget announcements from short-term political goals, like winning elections, at the expense of long-term economic strategy, NIESR said. enltr??And we are off, with our Deputy Director @AdrianPabst1  setting the scene outlining the main issues the UK economy is currently facing ???? #UKeconomy #GeneralElection #GE2024 @RoyalEconSoc https://t.co/Jrzu9DuKvu pic.twitter.com/O6ZQzQMm1f  — National Institute of Economic and Social Research (@NIESRorg) May 30, 2024 enltrNow over to Ben Caswell who is presenting the macroeconomic context of the UK economy According to our forecast, the Govt will not meet its #fiscal  targets ?? Some of the utility of the fiscal targets are lost here... that's why a new framework is needed ?? #GE2024  … pic.twitter.com/7nkn0ubCjg  — National Institute of Economic and Social Research (@NIESRorg) May 30, 2024 enltrA new framework based on 3? main points ?? #PublicInvestment #FiscalEvents #PublicSectorNetWorth #GE2024 #GeneralElection pic.twitter.com/Jf6Y1n9pm0  — National Institute of Economic and Social Research (@NIESRorg) May 30, 2024 block-time published-time 12.27pm BST   Britain’s manufacturers have also issued a manifesto for the warring political parties to digest.  Make UK are hoping for a “bold economic vision” that puts the importance of the economy across every Ministerial portfolio. That, they say, would spur growth and help the UK compete with the US and China in the race to develop green technologies. Make UK are calling for five specific measures in the first 100 days of the new government – including a focus on where to stay aligned with Europe, and where to diverge…. Announce a long-term modern Industrial Strategy to underpin all economic policymaking which has cross Government commitment. This should be backed by the re-introduction of an Industry Strategy Council and a new Cabinet Office backed Committee to ensure the implementation of the Strategy across GovernmentAlign the UK CBAM (Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism) with the EU CBAM in terms of timescale and design to provide a level playing field with the EUCommence a root-and-branch review of the Apprenticeship Levy as a funding mechanism, as well as the wider apprenticeship systemRe-establish an updated, modern Manufacturing Advisory ServiceEstablish a mechanism for ongoing and active consultation with industry to decide where it is appropriate to maintain alignment with EU regulatory changes or, where opportunities for divergence might apply. block-time published-time 11.23am BST   Bank of England allots another record amount in short-term repos    A Bank of England facility which gives commercial banks cheap access to funds has seen record demand, again, amid worries that the money markets are running short of cash.  The BoE allocated over £17bn of one-week funds in its latest short-term repo operation  this morning, the largest take-up since the facility was launched in October 2022. The repo operation allows banks to borrow from the BoE at Bank rate, in return for handing over high-quality assets as collateral. It is meant to keep short-term market interest rates in line with Bank Rate by ensuring banks don’t need to pay more to access reserves in the money markets. But there are concerns that banks are tapping the short-term repo because market liquidity which is being drained as the BoE continue to sell bonds acquired through years of quantitative easing (QE). This “quantitative tightening” (QT) scheme involves the Bank selling bonds back to the market, leading to a drop in liquidity. The Financial Times reported yesterday  that analysts at Barclays, Bank of America and NatWest believe this scarcity of cash could cause the BoE to slow down the process of shrinking its balance sheet when it reviews its QT policy in September. enltrBank of England bond sales blamed for cash shortage https://t.co/JO88uu8rYd  — FT Breaking News (@ftbreakingnews) May 29, 2024 block-time published-time 10.39am BST   In another boost for Europe’s economy, euro-area economic confidence has improved this month.  The European Commission’s monthy sentiment indicator has risen to 96 this month, up from 95.6 in April. However, economists had expected a larger rise. Readings for industrial confidence also ticked up. roltrEurozone Consumer Confidence May F: -14.3 (prev -14.3) - Services Confidence May: 6.5 (est 6.5; prev 6.5) - Industrial Confidence May: -9.9 (est -9.6; prev -10.5) - Economic Confidence May: 96.0 (est 96.1; prev 95.6) — LiveSquawk (@LiveSquawk) May 30, 2024 block-time published-time 10.32am BST  Europe’s “strong job market” is driving its economic recovery, says Bert Colijn, senior economist for the eurozone at ING : Following this morning’s drop  in the eurozone unemployment rate, Colijn says: Unemployment was already sitting near historic lows during the period of stagnation. In April, unemployment dropped from 6.5 to 6.4%,  once again reaching the lowest point since the eurozone was founded in 1999. The strong job market is helping the economic recovery as it keeps wage growth elevated, and has allowed purchasing power to recover after the inflation spike. The question is whether the economic pickup will result in lower unemployment from here. We doubt it. Expectations for employment for both services and industry have actually trended down despite better economic prospects and we expect that the modest economic recovery will largely result in productivity gains. enltrWeakening hiring expectations for businesses in the eurozone while the economy is picking up suggests that unemployment is unlikely to trend lower but that a much anticipated productivity pickup is imminent. pic.twitter.com/1RtLRo1DbT  — Bert Colijn (@BertColijn) May 30, 2024 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.32am BST block-time published-time 10.24am BST   Eurozone unemployment rate falls to record low    Newsflash: unemployment across the eurozone has fallen to a new record low, a week before Europeans head to the polls for the European Parliament elections.   Statistics body Eurostat reports that the seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate across the euro area fell to 6.4% in April, down from 6.5% in March. That’s the lowest since the single currency was created, Eurostat data shows. In the wider EU, the jobless rate remained at 6%. This suggests that the higher interest rates imposed by the European Central Bank to fight inflation is not hurting the labour market. roltrEuro area #unemployment  at 6.4% in April 2024, EU at 6.0% https://t.co/1znbPeuR5z pic.twitter.com/kBD983Ycni  — EU_Eurostat (@EU_Eurostat) May 30, 2024 Eurostat estimates that 13.149 million persons in the EU, of whom 10.998 million in the euro area, were unemployed in April, adding: Compared with March 2024, unemployment decreased by 103 thousand in the EU and by 100 thousand in the euro area.Compared with April 2023, unemployment increased by 95 thousand in the EU and decreased by 101 thousand in the euro area. Across the EU, unemployment was highest in Spain (at 11.7%) and Greece (10.8%) in April, and lowest in Czechia (2.7%) and Poland (3%). At its peak, during the eurozone crisis in 2013, eurozone unemployment rose over 12%, but then fell steadily – before a brief spike in the Covid-19 pandemic. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.29am BST block-time published-time 10.04am BST   Back me for low interest rates, Rishi Sunak claims    The Bank of England has been doing its best to keep out of the general election campaign.  Earlier this week it cancelled all speeches by its policymakers for the duration of the upcoming 4 July General Election, meaning we shouldn’t hear any public statements from central bank officials until the public has voted. That would prevent the Bank committing news, by commenting on the state of the economy, or hinting when it might lower borrowing costs. Now, though, Rishi Sunak has piled into the void by claiming that a vote for the Tories is a vote for cuts to interest rates. Sunak told The Times: “Of course it is, because we are the party who has committed to bringing down inflation, which is a necessary condition for bringing down interest rates. And I think people can see we have delivered that. And that allows us to think about the future in a more positive and confident way.” enltrRishi Sunak has claimed that a vote for his governing Conservative Party at the UK general election is a vote for interest rate cuts, drawing the Bank of England into a campaign it has been trying to avoid https://t.co/eiUM7eMPV2  — Bloomberg (@business) May 30, 2024 Inflation is a funny beast – politicians are desperate to blame global factors when it’s going up, but rush to take the credit when it falls. And either way, as the Bank of England is independent, it gets the credit for controlling prices (and the blame for losing control). Anyway, Labour are warning that they would be starting from a difficult position if they win the election.  Darren Jones, Labour’s  shadow Treasury minister, ruled out rises to income tax, national insurance or VAT, adding: The fiscal inheritance is going to be really hard, it’ll be the worst that any party has inherited since the second world war.  Related:  Keir Starmer gives speech as Labour rules out rises to income tax, national insurance and VAT – UK politics live block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.05am BST block-time published-time 9.40am BST   ‘Do not travel’ alert issued after freight train derails    A “do not travel” alert has been issued after a freight train derailed on a major route between England and Scotland, PA Media reports.  Services are being cancelled and delayed because of the incident on the West Coast Main Line between Carlisle and Oxenholme Lake District on Wednesday night, National Rail Enquiries added. National Rail says: A derailed freight train between Carlisle and Oxenholme Lake District means some lines are blocked. Trains may be cancelled, revised or severely delayed by up to 60 minutes. Major disruption is expected until 14:00. Train operators Avanti West Coast and TransPennine Express issued the “do not travel” alert, urging passengers not to attempt to use their services for journeys between Preston and Scotland on Thursday. Ticket holders can delay journeys until Friday or travel with other operators. block-time published-time 9.37am BST   UK cost of living squeeze eases    The cost rises hammering UK households has slowed in the last quarter.  The Office for National Statistics reports that UK household costs, as measured by the Household Costs Index (HCI), rose 4.4%, slowing from the annual rate of 5.3% in January 2024. That chimes with the latest inflation data, which showed a slowdown in price rises this year. Interestingly, higher income households saw the highest inflation rate. Here’s the details: By comparison, household costs rose 5.0% for high-income households (decile 9) and 3.9% for low-income households (decile 2).By tenure type, mortgage and other owner occupier households had the highest annual inflation rate of 5.5%, reflecting rising mortgage interest payments; by contrast, the rate for outright owner occupiers was the lowest at 3.3%.Private renters’ HCI inflation rate was higher than social and other renters, at 4.6% and 4.3% respectively; this follows a period between October 2023 and January 2024 where the two groups had similar inflation rates.Non-retired households continued to experience a higher annual rate of inflation (4.8%) than retired households (3.4%).Households with children’s annual inflation rate fell to 4.8% while households without children fell to 4.2%. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.13pm BST block-time published-time 9.23am BST   Zoopla: more homes for sale will keep prices in check    In the property sector, the number of homes for sale in the UK is at the highest level in eight years, according to website Zoopla.  Zoopla reports that the supply of homes for sale is 20% higher than this time last year, with £230bn worth of housing for sale, up £45bn on this time last year. This is likely to keep a lid on house price rises this year, Zoopla suspects, even though the upcoming general election could slow the pace of new sales in the coming weeks. enltrThe pre-election lead-up is expected to slow momentum for agreed sales, which are currently up 13% on last year, but not stall it. Despite house price inflation over the last quarter improving +0.4%, annually it remained negative at -0.1%. As stock levels increase at a higher… pic.twitter.com/9jJr8WMkpE  — Emma Fildes (@emmafildes) May 30, 2024  Zoopla also reports that there were modest house price falls across Southern England, as the north/south divide in annual house price growth continues. They say: This split in house price inflation is most evident at a city level with the the strongest house price growth in Belfast (+3.6%), Burnley (+2.5%) and Bolton (2.4%), and the highest house price falls in Ipswich (-3%), Hastings (-2.7%) and Norwich (-2.4%).  enltrWell-stocked property shelves enable buyers to shop around reducing markups and facilitating discounts in southern areas where budgets can no longer afford the bullish price tag and second homes have become burdened with additional tax. @Zoopla  May HPI 2024 pic.twitter.com/G7N1Bx6UB5  — Emma Fildes (@emmafildes) May 30, 2024 block-time published-time 9.21am BST   TSB: Issue is resolved    Those IT problems at TSB appear to be solved!  A TSB spokesperson tells us: “We’re aware some customers had issues logging into our app and online banking this morning. This issue is now resolved and we’re sorry for any inconvenience it caused.” block-time published-time 8.59am BST   TSB customers report problems with online banking    Another day, another problem with Britain’s banking apps.  Today it’s TSB whose customers are reporting problems accessing their accounts. According to Downdetector,  there was a spike in reports of glitches at TSB Bank this morning. Many customers are posting on social media that they can’t get their app, or internet banking, to work: enltr @TSB  great time for the system to do down. Can’t log into my app or internet banking — ashlie Cunningham (@ashliec1985) May 30, 2024 enltr @TSB  your app is down again. Reads my face then just stays on the login screen. — Lara Boyd (@2008_LJB) May 30, 2024  TSB is telling customers that it’s aware they are experiencing issues with its digital services, and working hard to resolve it. A TSB spokesperson says: “We’re aware that some customers have had difficulty logging into the app and online banking. We’re sorry for any inconvenience and are working hard to resolve it as soon as possible.” They added that the issues were “intermittent” meaning that in some cases, customers were blocked but later able to get through on subsequent login attempts. On Tuesday, NatWest’s banking app crashed for several hours, leaving thousands of frustrated customers across the UK without access to their accounts.  TSB customers are used to technical problems; in 2018, a planned IT upgrade turned into a full-scale crisis, with up to 1.9 million customers locked out of their accounts for days. City regulators later fined  TSB   £48m for “widespread and serious” failings in its IT migration.  Related:  TSB bank faces large compensation bill and fines over online chaos block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.12am BST block-time published-time 8.35am BST   Banknote and passport printer De La Rue is in talks with suitors interested in buying each of its core divisions following a strategic review.  The Basingstoke-based group, which prints banknotes for the Bank of England and other central banks across the world, said it has spoken with “a number of parties who have made proposals” related to either its currency or authentication operations. Nevertheless, it stressed that there is no certainty that interest will result in any deal.  Clive Whiley, chairman at De La Rue, told shareholders this morning: “Since my appointment a year ago, the board has considered a broad range of possible strategic alternatives including transactions with multiple parties which may involve a combination with, or the sale of, the group’s divisions. “The board confirms that the discussions with the relevant parties are advancing, and we expect to update further at the time of the full year results in July.” De La Rue shares have jumped 5% this morning. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.36am BST block-time published-time 8.29am BST   Shares in online car marketplace Autotrader are roaring ahead, after it reported a jump in sales and earnings for last year.   Autotrader’s revenues increased by 14% in the year to 31 March, while operating profits increased by 26%.  Autotrader benefited from a “robust” market for used cars, which are selling faster than before the pandemic as supplies gradually improved. The new car retail market has been more challenging, though, with discounting starting to return to the market. Autotrader’s share have jummped 12% this morning, making it the top riser on the FTSE 100 share index.  Keith Bowman,  equity analyst at interactive investor, says: High interest rates mean it can still be expensive for people to finance the purchase of a vehicle, and it’s interesting to see Google taking an interest in the UK motoring market. Costs generally for businesses also remain elevated, while potential for forecourt consolidation persists as operators such as Cargiant and Motorpoint look to grow. On the upside, Auto Trader is still the dominant market player and continues to spend on innovation. More and more dealers are trialling its ‘Deal Builder’ product, which allows car buyers to value their part exchange vehicle, apply for finance, and reserve a vehicle online. Group net bank debt has also reduced significantly. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.29am BST block-time published-time 8.16am BST  In London, the FTSE 100 index has opened in the red, down 16 points at 8167 points, the lowest since 2 May. European markets are also sagging, with the Stoxx 600 down 0.2% in early trading. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.24am BST block-time published-time 8.06am BST   Rand weakens as South Africa election results come in    South Africa’s rand has fallen over 1% against the US dollar today, as early results from the South African general election come in.  Early results from yesterday’s poll in South Africa’s election suggest the governing African National Congress (ANC) party could lose its majority, although it is still expected to remain as the largest party. enltrBloomberg reporting that ANC may only get 41.5% of the national vote. The rand weakens to 18.65 vs the USD (from 18.25 yesterday morning). — Johann Biermann ???? (@JohannBiermann1) May 30, 2024  Reuters has the details: With results in from 10% of polling stations, the ANC’s share of the vote in Wednesday’s election stood at 42.3%, with the pro-business Democratic Alliance (DA) on 26.3% and the Marxist Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) on 8.1%, data from the electoral commission showed. If the final results were to resemble the early picture, the ANC would be forced to make a deal with one or more other parties to govern - a situation that could lead to unprecedented political volatility in the coming weeks or months. The rand is down 1.2%, at 18.67 to the US dollar. enltr #SouthAFrica  : the rand slips as early results show the ANC's vote dropping a lot. From ballots from 10% of voting districts counted, the ANC's share is 42.3%. Big drops in Gauteng, KZN and W Cape. NB: it is still very early. https://t.co/luqitIcZ5v pic.twitter.com/lyGLL6lFK3  — Paul Wallace (@PaulWallace123) May 30, 2024 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.08am BST block-time published-time 7.44am BST   Baroness Martha Lane Fox,  president of the BCC,  is urging politicians to focus on helping businesses:  “In the frenzy of the election campaign, it’s crucial that all politicians focus on the power of British business.   “As I travel across the UK meeting Chambers and their businesses, I hear amazing stories of people determined to grow their businesses and make a difference in our remarkable country. But time and again businesses tell me they want to see a long-term vision for the economy.”   “Our manifesto showcases practical ideas on how politicians can help companies successfully navigate the challenges and opportunities our economy faces. It’s a blueprint for boosting productivity and a pathway to higher growth.   “Whichever party is in power after July 4th the immediate focus must be on implementing our five-point-plan for business. The stakes for business from the next government could not be higher.”  block-time published-time 7.39am BST   Business group says improving relations with EU is a priority    UK businesses are urging the next government to make improving relations with the European Union a key part of its drive to revive the economy.  The British Chambers of Commerce Election Manifesto, published today, cites improved relations with the EU as one of its five priorities, saying this would help lower costs and boost trade. The BCC, which operates over 50 UK Chambers across the country, is calling for: An Industrial Strategy with green innovation at its heart.Better skills planning, bringing businesses and training providers together.Business rates reform to encourage growth and investment.Improved relations with the European Union to cut the costs for business.A Government appointed AI champion for SMEs to spearhead uptake of new technology.  Shevaun Haviland,  director general of the BCC, says this isn’t about reversing Brexit, explaining…. “The EU is the UK’s biggest market, so we urgently need to get a better trading relationship with our closest neighbour. It’s not about rewriting the referendum result, it’s about cutting red-tape and promoting trade. Both the Conservatives and Labour have been criticised for not focusing on the impact of leaving the EU in this referendum, with former deputy prime minister Michael Heseltine warning the election campaign will be the “most dishonest in modern times”.  Related:  Ignoring Brexit will make election most dishonest in modern times – Heseltine UK food importers of food from the EU have warned that new post-Brexit checks introduced this spring will push up costs, and create painful delays at the border.  Related:  Food importers in UK say new Brexit checks could add 60% to costs  Related:  UK flower industry thrown into chaos by new Brexit border checks block-time published-time 7.37am BST   Dimon warns of stagflation risks    Jamie Dimon, the head of JP Morgan, has caused further jitters by warning yesterday that the US economy risks stagnation – the toxic mix of rising prices and slow growth. Speaking at a Wall Street conference yesterday, Dimon warned that the past five years of massive fiscal and monetary stimulus risked tipping the US into deflation.  Dimon said: “I’m not saying it’s going to happen, I just give the odds much higher than other people,” Dimon added. “I look at the amount of fiscal and monetary stimulus that has taken place over the last five years—it has been so extraordinary, how can you tell me it won’t lead to stagflation?” “It might not….But I, for one, am quite prepared for it.” Dimon also explained that JP Morgan is prepared both for a soft landing, and something rather bumpier, saying: “If we have a soft landing and rates stay where they are, come down a little bit—which is what the world expects, everyone’s fine. If you have a harder landing with stagflation you’re going to see a lot of stress and strain in the system from banks to leveraged companies to real estate to a whole bunch of stuff.” block-time published-time 7.37am BST   Introduction: Inflation fears weigh on markets    Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of business, the financial markets and the world economy.  Fears over sticky inflation – and even the dreaded stagflation – are hitting the markets this week. Investors are growing more anxious that global interest rates will stay higher for longer, a worry that has knocked shares in recent days, as the yields – or rate of return – on government bonds push higher. Last night, the UK’s FTSE 100 index fell for the sixth day in a row and traders are bracing for further losses today. enltrEuropean Opening Calls: #FTSE #DAX #CAC #AEX #MIB #IBEX #OMX #SMI #STOXX pic.twitter.com/whK0de9eeW  — Pedro Gallego Gil (@_SirPeter) May 30, 2024 Central banks are attempting to slow growth through high interest rates to dampen inflation, but without cooling their economies so much that unemployment jumps. But with US inflation running at 3.4% last month, still well over the 2% target, confidence that this soft landing can be achieved is faltering. Yesterday, inflation in Germany came in higher than forecast. As Mizuho Bank said in a commentary: “Hotter and stickier than expected global inflation appears to be taking the air out of asset markets. In other words, “Goldilocks” coming undone. And worries about adverse demand impact from higher rates seeping through.” Yesterday, a surpringly weak auction of US debt sent fresh jitters through trading floors, with buyers demanding higher rates as they bid for the bonds.  Kyle Rodda,  senior financial market analyst at capital.com,  explains: A rise in global yields is forcing a re-rating in global equity prices, with Wall Street falling further overnight. Upward pressure on yields was compounded by a weak seven-year auction, reigniting fears about how the US will fund its rising deficit. Although the European Central Ban seems certain to cut interest rate next week, both the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England are expected to delay their first cuts until the autumn.  The agenda 8am BST: Swiss GDP report for Q1 202410am BST: Eurozone unemployment report for April10am BST: Eurozone confidence stats for May10am BST: Statistics on EU trade with Ukraine1.30pm BST: Second estimate of US GDP for Q1 20241.30pm BST: US jobless claims block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.45am BST Load-Date: May 30, 2024  End of Document
