   Even after Brexit, the UK is getting pulled closer to Europe The Times (London) January 17, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 33 Length: 962 words Byline: David Smith Body   In a fortnight, it will be four years since the UK formally left the European Union, and more than seven and a half since we entered the Brexit departure lounge with the vote to leave. Some who advocated Brexit looked forward to a new world in which the UK would be less dependent on the EU and its single market, and able to explore new frontiers elsewhere. '' That is why a recent finding from the UK in a Changing Europe (UKICE) think tank was rather interesting and on the face of it counterintuitive. UKICE's latest trade tracker, covering the third quarter of last year, showed that most (53.3 per cent) of UK trade was with the rest of the EU, a figure that has not been as high since before the June 2016 referendum. This, it seems, flies in the face of logic. The UK left the EU with an unsatisfactory trade deal, and the free flow of trade has been replaced by renewed frictions. So what is going on? There are two points to be made. Proximity is important, and we will always trade more with countries that are close by. What economists call "gravity" matters. The second point is that the high EU trade share reflects the weakness of UK exports in general and non-EU exports (as well as imports) in particular. Official figures show that export volumes (of goods and services) are nearly 5 per cent lower than in the fourth quarter of 2019, immediately before Brexit, a very weak performance in comparison with other G7 countries. The UK is a less open economy, defined by the combined share of imports and exports to GDP. The UK negotiated trade deals with some non-EU countries, mainly by rolling over existing EU deals, but these are not proving their worth, unsurprisingly. Australia and New Zealand combined are less than 1 per cent of UK trade. India, with whom negotiations are proceeding, is not much better, on 1.73 per cent. A trade deal with America is "the white whale" of post- Brexit trade talk according to UKICE, but it has not been sighted, nor is it likely to be for the foreseeable future. Donald Trump, if elected, has pledged to introduce 10 per cent tariffs on imports across the board, including those from the UK, only one of the very many ways in which his reelection would do damage. Britain thus remains in thrall to the EU when it comes to trade, but even trade with Europe faces new barriers. Longdelayed border controls on imports from the EU, which the government has held back on for fear of adding to inflation and exacerbating the cost of living crisis, are about to take effect. This will make importing from the EU more difficult and expensive. Trade is not the only area where the UK looks to have moved closer to Europe since Brexit. There was a time when the UK looked to America as a growth example. Over long periods, UK growth exceeded the big economies of Europe and was close to America's rate of expansion. In the period following the financial crisis and leading up to the referendum, when Europe suffered the eurozone crisis, UK growth nearly matched that of America, despite austerity, with cumulative growth of 13.3 per cent from the start of 2010 to the spring and early summer of 2016. America was ahead, with 14.9 per cent cumulative growth, but not by much, roughly 0.2 per cent a year more. Over the 20 years from 1996 to 2016, the UK's cumulative growth was 53 per cent, not far behind America's 61 per cent. Germany's growth over that period, by comparison, was 31 per cent, and France 37 per cent. Things have changed. The UK economy has had cumulative growth of 8 per cent since the second quarter of 2016, while America has raced away with 18 per cent. Since the eve of formal Brexit, the fourth quarter of 2019, the UK economy has grown by 1.4 per cent, and America 7.4 per cent. In growth terms, Britain has gone from mid-Atlantic performance to something much more European. France has done better since 2016 and late 2019, with gross domestic product up by 8.5 per cent and 1.7 per cent respectively. The eurozone, often associated with weak growth, has grown by a cumulative 10.4 per cent since 2016's second quarter, and by 2.9 per cent since late 2019. The UK, it is true, has continued to outgrow Germany and Italy, with their GDP up by 5.8 per cent and 6.5 per cent respectively since 2016, though previously slow-growing Italy is up by 3.4 per cent since late 2019 and the cumulative difference relative to the UK is a lot smaller than it was. This changes again when measured on a per capita basis, which some would see as the best measure of economic progress. Measured by per capita GDP, on which the UK has struggled, particularly recently - there has been a 0.4 per cent decline since late 2019 - the comparisons are, if anything, more interesting. For both Germany and the UK, there was a 4 per cent rise between 2016 and 2022, and both were beaten by France, up 5 per cent. All three, though, lost out to Italy, with its falling population, where per capita GDP rose by 8.5 per cent. America showed an 11 per cent per capita rise over the same period. On trade, where the UK has drawn closer to the EU, and on growth, where Britain's outperformance has disappeared and, if anything, has been replaced by underperformance, the UK has become more European. Some would say that it will take decades, not years, for trade patterns to change. Service sector exports, which now exceed exports of goods in value, may be less geographically constrained and could be what the future holds. But the latest figures confirm what we probably already knew. Britain is still, as somebody once said, a windswept island off the coast of the Continent. And we will continue to be heavily influenced by what happens elsewhere in Europe. David Smith is Economics Editor of The Sunday Times david.smith@sunday-times.co.uk '' Graphic    Trade with Europe has confounded the hopes of Brexiteers Load-Date: January 17, 2024  End of Document
