   From Wicklow to Kerry as last of Sea Life's fish find a new home Bray People (Ireland) March 8, 2024 (LOAD-DATE)  Copyright 2024 INM plc All Rights Reserved  Length: 886 words Body   Ever since the doors closed on Bray's Sea Life in December last year, the fate of its fish and other marine animals has been difficult to trace after communication with its UK owners, Merlin, essentially dried up.  A chance sighting of a small van on Bray Seafront on Tuesday, March 5, did hint at one destination for some of its creatures, as it belonged to Ocean World in Dingle, County Kerry.  Dr Kevin Flannery, marine biologist and one of the directors at Ocean World, said his aquarium did offer to take some of the fish after the closure of Sea Life, given the options to relocate marine life were limited.  "Most of the fish went up north, to Exploris in Portaferry - the big rays and the black-tipped sharks. We got small fish from them, we did them a favour because they couldn't get rid of some of them. And the Sealife centres in the UK took over the rest. But we were willing to give them a hand," he said.  Kevin said the closure of Sea Life was a real pity, as it was the only aquarium on the east coast, which just leaves Dingle's Ocean World, Exploris and Galway's Atlantaquaria. But there was a sense of inevitability over its demise, Kevin believed.    After Brexit, a new EU Animal Health Regulation came into force, which created strict new controls on the movement of animals into the EU.  "They were running into problems because if you were shipping from a third country, which is the UK, into Europe, which is Ireland, you have big veterinary problems. You can't transport animals like you used to, other than over to the UK. And the UK was its main home for the transport and the collection of fish," Kevin explained.   He said that "could be one" of the contributing factors to its sad demise. The other issue was financial, he surmised.  "We had a look at it, and the investment needed to be put back into it, because it had been let run down for so long, and it [the investment] would have been colossal. The overhead and energy costs have gone up and you're pushed to the limit, because you're competing against the likes of Dublin Zoo or Fota Island, which are charities as such. "They don't have to pay the VAT, like a private company. Then the increased VAT on the hospitality sector, which included us, meant your overheads went through the roof. It's a problem because you're depending on tourists coming through the door. So, I'd say they looked at the feasibility of it and the cost of re-investing, and when the Government upped the VAT, it was a problem." "The footfall was good, because basically you were in an ideal place," Kevin said, when asked if the numbers were there to support it. However, its capacity for growth and innovation was hampered by the building it was housed in.  "They had no room for expansion, no room for doing anything else, like conservation work," he explained. "We do a lot of conservation work, we were lucky as we got funding through the blue economy, through Bord Iascaigh Mhara, and we added on other attractions. We put in huge immersive experiences of over half-a-million. But Bray couldn't do that, as it was confined between two restaurants and a public toilet. That is a big problem." Bord Iascaigh Mhara, Ireland's Seafood Development Agency, announced, in 2022, the Brexit Blue Economy Enterprise Development Scheme which was open for applications for grant funding to enable coastal communities to restructure, reconfigure, retrain, and diversify post-Brexit. It was a safety ring thrown to counter the adverse economic and social consequences of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union on businesses operating in the blue economy and located in communities within 10km of the coastline. The scheme had  a €25m budget available for the years 2022 and 2023, funded under the EU Brexit Adjustment Reserve. It is understood there was no funding open to Sea Life which could have saved it last year, but they should have looked at the Blue Economy fund when they had a chance, Kevin said. "It was done for marine and coastal areas because we have suffered the most because of Brexit, we lost 25pc of pur fishing quota. So, as well as decommissioning the vessels, this fund was for re-investing in coastal communities." Aside from the funding it received, Ocean World's directors "do re-invest the money that they make. It goes back into it. And all the local businesses, it's benefitting them as well. And we did get the funding, which was available to SeaLife and everybody else, but they didn't take it up." As an independent amenity, "you have to make it pay, you have to re-invest, every two to three years we come up with something different". Kevin said Dingle, as a seaside tourist favourite is now "flying" despite the loss of its famous bottle-nose dolphin, Fungi, when there would have been up to 16 vessels operating marine tours to see him. Now they still run eco tours, sea safaris, where "you can go for an hour, or you can go for a day. The numbers have increased in the area last year."  As for Fungi, who went missing in October 2020, with numerous theories over his whereabouts, Kevin is more matter-of-fact.   "Aged, and he died, like the whales and dolphins, they get washed ashore when they become a certain age. There's two inevitables in life, and that's one of them, death." He didn't say what the other one was.    Load-Date: March 8, 2024  End of Document
