   German Dexit? Even the Brexit nightmare has not 'vaccinated' Euroskeptics CE Noticias Financieras English January 26, 2024 Friday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1438 words Body    In 2014, the European elections were marked by a strong exit component in the programs of the Eurosceptic forces. It was not until the following ones, in 2019, that calls for referendums to leave the community project disappeared. The Brexit experience had shown that outside the European consortia it is very cold. During these years, the discourse of far-right forces has mutated focusing on the idea of weakening the EU from within. However, from the Netherlands to Germany, new discourses have begun to emerge, taking the UK's exit from the bloc as a reference and heating up the campaign towards the polls . From June 6 to 9, more than 400 million Europeans are called to elect their representatives for a new legislature that is expected to be convulsive and uncertain.  From Marine Le Pen in France to Giorgia Meloni in Italy, populist leaders have in recent years abandoned the banner of Frexit or Italexit. Their ambition is no longer to leave the EU club, but to change it from within in their own image. What has recently united the radical right-wing forces, sharply divided on issues such as relations with China or the war in Russia, is their desire to transform the European project into a "club of nations". But calls for an exit from the EU are resurfacing. The winner of the last elections in the Netherlands, the Eurosceptic Geert Wilders, a self-confessed admirer and sympathizer of Brexit, does support Nexit and in his program he advocates cutting off European funds until the final moment of goodbye arrives.  In the German locomotive, the leader of Alternative for Germany (AfD), Alice Weidel, has recently assured that if she came to power she would propose a German Dexit, taking as a reference what the United Kingdom did seven years ago. Her objective, as she explained in an interview with the Financial Times, is "to promote the country's self-determination". His proposal comes in the country with the most weight in the EU, in none other than the German locomotive, which is going through a complicated economic and political moment.  "AfD's demands are anachronistic even for European far-right parties. If you look at Le Pen, at Viktor Orbán, at Law and Justice (PiS) in Poland, not a single one of them is considering an exit from the EU. They have been smart enough to draw their conclusions from Brexit. AfD is too stupid for that. Their calculation is simple: the worse off Germany is, the better for us. And for Germany there is nothing worse than leaving the EU", analyzes Daniel Freund, German MEP for the Greens, in an interview with El Confidencial.  The tripartite coalition led in Berlin by the Social Democrat Olaf Scholz together with the Liberals and the Greens has reached the halfway point of its mandate with a low level of popularity. At the same time, Europe's lungs have become Europe's sick man as its economy enters recession. All this, together with the agitated context of the migratory challenge, has boosted the far-right AfD in a moment of meteoric rise in which all the polls position it as the second force in voting intentions.  The campaign of the German far right, both national and European, has the fight against immigration at its epicenter. Recently, an investigation has been made public revealing its secret plan to deport refugees en masse to North Africa. From the party's delegation in the European Parliament, they detailed to this newspaper their ideology for the European elections to be held in the coming months. "Our election program does not envisage an immediate referendum on leaving the EU, but, if necessary, an orderly dissolution of the EU, together with our European partners, and a new foundation as a Union of European Nations. The corresponding reform process must be initiated first. Only if all other options fail will a referendum be considered in person. The word Dexit does not appear in our program for the EU elections," say party sources.  The initial bet goes through hardening the migratory policies, reducing the competences of the European Commission, increasing the margin of action of the national governments or narrowing the Schengen freedoms. A roadmap that for many would mean the beginning of the end of the EU. AfD knows that campaign slogans are one thing, but it is another to carry out this roadmap in the most important country, in one of its founders and in a geopolitical chessboard set on fire by war. But he is already laying the seed.  "A primary objective of the AfD in the current EU Parliament is to win over parties from all countries in the next election period for the future project of a new European economic and interest community . Together with them we want to realize our ideas. As long as the misguided construction of the EU persists, we will work to prevent further restrictions on national sovereignty and a further redistribution of the wealth and assets of our citizens through EU regulations", they assure.  The European campaign heats up  Three years after it was consummated, the UK's exit has not been the magic pill that has solved all the island's national and global problems. On the contrary, the political, social and economic chaos caused by its voluntary departure from the EU bloc has translated into a kind of nostalgia for the times within the bloc. A majority (56%) of British citizens describe Brexit as a mistake and two-thirds advocate a return to the 12-star club , according to a poll released last year by several local newspapers.  "AfD is playing with fire. We already saw what happened in the UK when one party campaigned against EU membership. We will have to expect a lot of fake news and anti-EU propaganda for the upcoming election campaign. However, there are big differences between the two. In Germany there is a strong pro-European consensus among all democratic parties. And support among German voters for the EU is very high. Germany borders eight member states with daily crossings of hundreds of thousands of citizens. The anti-EU campaign will do more harm to AfD than to the positive image Germans have of the EU," Freund estimates.  The campaign for the elections in just over four months will not be a plebiscite on pro-European and anti-European programs. Elements such as climate change or immigration will be the determining factors, according to a study recently published by the European Council of Foreign Relations (ECFR). However, the antagonistic positions on what Europe wants for the future will have their moment and space.  The new configuration of the parliamentary arc, after the next elections, will surely leave a sharp shift to the right. And it is here that the European People's Party will have to decide on its dance partner. The center-left, as it has always been to date, or the forces leaning to its right. According to a seat projection study released this week by ECFR, anti-European populist parties are expected to win the elections in nine EU member states. Specifically, in Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland and Slovakia. They would come second or third in nine other countries: Bulgaria, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Portugal, Romania, Spain and Sweden.  Moreover, for the first time, the Identity and Democracy group, which includes the Freedom Party of Geert Wilders, the National Rally of Marine Le Pen or the German AfD, would jump from the fifth to the third position in the European Parliament, ousting Renew Europe. This result, "would have serious consequences" for the EU's political agenda, on climate issues, support for Ukraine or the application of the rule of law within the bloc. The study also concludes that, in the Spanish case, the European elections will be a referendum on the government agreement agreed between the PSOE and Junts and anticipates a widespread reprobation of it.  In 2014, the European elections were marked by a strong exit component in the programs of the Eurosceptic forces. It was not until the following ones, in 2019, when calls for referendums to leave the community project disappeared. The Brexit experience had shown that outside the European consortia it is very cold. During these years, the discourse of far-right forces has mutated focusing on the idea of weakening the EU from within. However, from the Netherlands to Germany, new discourses have begun to emerge, taking the UK's exit from the bloc as a reference and heating up the campaign towards the polls . From June 6 to 9, more than 400 million Europeans are called to elect their representatives for a new legislature that is expected to be convulsive and uncertain.  Load-Date: January 27, 2024  End of Document
