   Gibraltar votes with consequences for post-Brexit deal CE Noticias Financieras English October 12, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 844 words Body   Gibraltar celebrates this Thursday a key election that could put an end to the government of socialist Fabian Picardo after twelve years in power. According to the latest polls, the GBC Conservatives led by Keith Azopardi have real options to move to Convent Place, seat of the Executive. The scenario is so uncertain that the election could be decided by a very small margin of votes. In the midst of negotiations on the post-Brexit agreement, the result has tremendous consequences for Spain because in the event that Azopardi - a name that is hardly known in London - wins, Madrid could play differently with its cards regarding the sovereignty issue. This is at least the "great concern" at the Rock, according to sources consulted. Not that the Conservative's position in the negotiations to resolve the Gibraltar situation - in limbo since the 2016 Brexit triumph - is different from Picardo's. Both want a common area between the Rock and the Schengen area that eliminates controls on the border with Spain, the only land border, along with that of Ireland that now links the United Kingdom with the community bloc. But the GBC leader is considered to have neither the mastery of the subject nor the personal contacts treasured by Picardo over the last twelve years. The Rock fears that the change of interlocutor at a crucial moment in the negotiations will work to Spain's advantage. According to the poll published last Thursday by the Gibraltar Chronicle newspaper and public broadcaster GBC, the opposition would reach the government of Gibraltar by a narrow margin: the GSD would get 49.18% of the vote and the socialist alliance GSLP / Liberals, 48.65%. This difference of only 0.53% could be the key for the Conservatives to obtain the nine of the 17 members of parliament needed to take power. It was last September 12 when Picardo announced the dissolution of Parliament and the calling of elections this Thursday, coinciding with Columbus Day. The appointment with the polls was scheduled for the last quarter of this year and Picardo, who has ruled the Rock since 2011, did not want to extend the calendar. His intention was to get a renewed mandate while Spain decides who to put in La Moncloa, a situation that could drag on until early next year. However, beyond the negotiations to solve the consequences of a Brexit that the Yankees did not want, the pandemic, the problems in primary health care and the delays in the construction of official promotion have been wearing down the socialist leader. Earlier this year, for a moment, it was thought that the announcement of white smoke for a post-Brexit agreement on Gibraltar would be immediate. After London and Brussels managed to put an end to the controversy over the Northern Ireland Protocol in February, with all the complexities that entails for a territory of difficult coexistence between Catholics and Protestants, it was thought that the necessary momentum would be achieved to resolve the issue of the Rock. But the negotiations ended up running aground and the elections in the Rock and Spain have left them at a standstill. Political paralysis benefits no one. Brexit forces Madrid and the Rock to find a pragmatic solution for coexistence. Around 30,000 people cross the fence every day. Among them, 15,000 workers, of whom 10,000 are Spaniards from an area such as Campo de Gibraltar, where unemployment rarely drops below 30%. On New Year's Eve 2020, a few hours before the end of the Brexit transition period, London and Madrid managed to close `in extremis' an agreement in principle to avoid the strict controls at the border. The text contained the guidelines to close a treaty between the European Commission and the United Kingdom on the Rock. But it is only a temporary solution that can be rescinded at any time and that could have a different course depending on whether the PP or PSOE finally governs in Spain. If you want flexibility in the fence, the Schengen border must be outsourced to the port and airport of the Rock. But that requires the presence of agents from Spain (Schengen member). And therein lies the crux of the matter. Especially considering that the land where the airport is built was not contemplated in the Treaty of Utrecht (1713-1715). The British took it over in the 19th century, when epidemics forced the population to move to the isthmus. In the negotiations there is talk of "a zone of shared prosperity", a euphemism to avoid talking about sovereignty over the British colony. But it is sovereignty, after all, that has set the context for the last 300 years. And the issue that, in the end, now hinders the longed-for white smoke. In Brussels, there is an interest in making progress in the negotiations. In any case, it wants to give its place to Spain which, as a member of the bloc, after Brexit managed to get the EU to guarantee it veto power for any pact reached regarding the Rock. Likewise, Madrid got the EU to mention, for the first time, Gibraltar as a colony, thus joining the criterion maintained on the territory by the UN since 1967. Load-Date: October 13, 2023  End of Document
