   Gibraltar travel warning issued to UK tourists and situation 'is ongoing' birminghammail.co.uk February 17, 2024 Saturday 8:21 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: TRAVEL; Version:1 Length: 305 words Byline: By, James Rodger Highlight: A travel expert has explained how life has changed for residents of Gibraltar since Brexit and the European Union referendum back in 2016. Body   Gibraltar residents face 'daily queues and delays' in Spain due to Brexit rules, it has been warned. A travel expert has explained how life has changed for residents of Gibraltar since Brexit and the European Union referendum back in 2016. Claudia Gualdi, travel intelligence data lead at Riskline, spoke to the Daily Express newspaper to explain how Brexit has impacted residents and what might help ease the queues. She said: "The prolonged debate around passport controls at the Gibraltar/Spain frontier has become a challenge for Gibraltans and Britons alike. "Gibraltar passport holders are less likely to be stopped at border crossings with Spain. But Spanish border officials frequently require UK passport holders, including those with Gibraltan residency cards, to submit additional documents. "These may include proof of a fully paid hotel booking with no cancellation fee, a valid reason for the visit, a return flight ticket and evidence of sufficient funds to cover the stay and departure from the country. Yet, these entry requirements are not so clear and not so regularly enforced, but they reportedly cause daily queues and delays." Claudia then added: "Negotiations between the EU and the UK on the post-Brexit relationship of Gibraltar with Europe are ongoing." Gibraltar is not part of the UK, but unlike all other British Overseas Territories, it was a part of the European Union along with the UK.  It participated in the Brexit referendum and it ceased, by default, to be a part of the EU upon the UK's withdrawal. In 2020, four years on from the Brexit vote, Spain and the United Kingdom reached an agreement in principle under which Gibraltar would join the European Union's Schengen Area. This cleared the way for the European Union and the British government in the UK to start formal negotiations on the matter. Load-Date: February 17, 2024  End of Document
