   Higher prices are what we'll pay for sovereignty i-news February 1, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 720 words Byline: Ian Dunt Body   You have to keep on reminding yourself of the past. You have to remember the lies and the disingenuousness and the mendacious gibberish. Because now, as it all comes tumbling down, they must be made to own it. Britain has finally introduced its post-Brexit controls on food, plant and animal imports from Europe, after delaying it five times. In April it will get worse, with the introduction of laborious and timeconsuming physical inspections. British exporters have been suffering the consequence of these checks for three years. Now they'll apply the other way too. But exporters and importers are only the first line of pain. The costs - in time, staff and money - are eventually passed on to the consumer. That's what Brexit sovereignty tastes like: the freedom to pay higher prices in a cost of living crisis. Checks require the resolution of complex and disparate capacity problems. You need to make sure you have enough vets to sign off on health certificates, for instance. We've known that this was a weak point for years. Most vets go into the business so they can cure a family dog, not so they can evaluate abattoirs. It's low-paid, underrecognised work. But whenever these sorts of problems were raised, it was treated as the bleating of "Remoaners" who didn't really love their country. A concern with technical details and objective reality was considered unpatriotic. Now it's all terribly, terribly real. Speaking on Sky News yesterday, Conservative MP Andrea Leadsom said: "Businesses knew at the time of Brexit that in leaving the European single market there would be additional checks at the border… There was no surprise about that." Compare that with Leadsom's television performances during the Brexit period. In 2016, she was repeatedly asked if the UK would have the same "access" to the single market. She answered very carefully. "I believe we will trade tariff-free," she said. And on the absolute small-print specifics, she was right. We do trade tariff-free. It's just that tariffs were never the real problem - checks were. Her communication at the time did nothing to make sure that "businesses knew… there would be additional checks at the border". Her message was that everything would be sweetness and light. And now we see it for what it is: drab, pointless, boring, administrative tedium. Establishing border checks on goods like it was the 1970s. Dismissing the unprecedented European advance towards frictionless trade and freedom of movement. A journey back to the bitter and redundant past. That is of course on the lower end of the duplicitous scale. At the top we have the architects, like Boris Johnson. The people who formulated the Brexit movement and benefited from it, then assured everyone about the brighter future they would secure by supporting it. In December 2020, Johnson said: "There will be no non-tariff barriers to trade." It's therefore strange to discover that the latest in a long line of deals to try to fix the non-tariff barriers to trade are being revealed, in this case between Britain, Northern Ireland and the EU. The contorted bureaucratic mess of Brexit has deprived Northern Ireland of a government due to Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) intransigence. Now it presents a riddle which is impossible to solve - namely, how can the UK and EU maintain distinct regulatory territories if there's an open border on the island of Ireland? It stokes the darkest of constitutional fires, messing around in the delicate consensus over the peace process. DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson claims there "will no longer be physical checks". That simply cannot be true. Downing Street wants to hold a parliamentary vote on the deal in a matter of hours, without any independent assessment of it, or time for real understanding of what's in it. So here we are again: people making impossible promises, deals passed in pointlessly tight timescales, and then years spent trying to unpick them and find out what on earth went wrong. That is why it is so important to remember. That's how we stop the endless cycle of mistakes. It's how we spot the next political salesman, with a glint in his eye, who makes overblown promises in order to pursue their ideology or professional advancement, and leaves us to pay the cost. Now we see it for what it is: a journey back to the bitter past Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
