   Historians will be kind to Leo Varadkar as we’re yet to figure him out thetimes.co.uk March 24, 2024 Sunday 12:01 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 993 words Byline: Newton Emerson Highlight: If there were a coherent philosophy behind the taoiseach’s approach since taking office in 2017, he failed to communicate it Body   Leo Varadkar called Ireland’s 2020 general election in the expectation of being rewarded for his handling of Brexit. He was brutally disappointed. Fine Gael dropped from first to third place, behind Fianna Fail and a soaring Sinn Fein. Voters did not care about Brexit: fewer than 1 per cent mentioned it in the exit poll. Their overwhelming concerns were health and housing. A theory has since taken hold that although Varadkar’s robust approach to Britain did him no favours at the ballot box, it benefited Sinn Fein by bringing assertive Irish nationalism into the mainstream. Like most divinations of the national mood, this is somewhat mystical and unprovable. Only 1 per cent of voters mentioned a united Ireland in the exit poll, although Sinn Fein had based its campaign around it. Varadkar certainly did not want an Anglophobic election. He called the vote to capitalise on what appeared to be a constructive personal relationship with Boris Johnson, the new British prime minster. Both men had agreed the Northern Ireland protocol at a private meeting four months previously. Even Northern Ireland seemed to be on the mend. Sinn Fein had ended its Stormont boycott and the DUP was being coaxed into living with Johnson’s deal. The standard defence of Varadkar’s uncompromising Brexit policy is that he was standing up for the Irish national interest and any taoiseach would or should have done the same. He is respected for it in Ireland, even if he was not rewarded. There is indignation that some Tory Brexiteers and Ulster Unionists consider him a hate figure because he would not “design a land border for them”, as Varadkar himself once put it. Much of this would be incontestable were it not for the conundrum of what constitutes the Irish nation. Is it the Republic, nationalist Ireland or everyone on the island, unionists included? It was not always clear which nation Varadkar was standing up for. When London and Brussels agreed the backstop in 2017, he said “no Irish government will ever again leave northern nationalists and Northern Ireland behind”. This invoked nationalist Ireland, yet Varadkar then abandoned northern nationalists on EU voting rights, limiting his view of the nation strictly to the Republic. He moved Fine Gael towards advocacy of a united Ireland and often mentioned the importance of including unionists.  Avoiding a hard border was simultaneously about protecting the Republic’s economy, protecting an all-island economy and protecting the Republic from violent republicans. This confusion explains if not excuses unionist complaints that Dublin was both meddling in Northern Ireland and not helping it. The Good Friday agreement should have been a guide through such confusion but Varadkar could seem confused about that as well. He was a firm believer in the spirit of the agreement, a supernatural being that tells nationalists what they want to hear. The agreement requires “that there won’t be a hard border”, he told the Dail in 2019, a line echoed in Brussels and Washington. In reality, the agreement says nothing about the nature of the border. It also rules out joint authority, yet the taoiseach claimed otherwise throughout the two Stormont collapses during his tenure. Conservative and unionist politicians who complained about Varadkar playing fast and loose with the agreement were swiftly told by opponents at home and abroad that Brexit was the original and far greater sin. Perhaps, but there was still sin on both sides. The unionist grievance that Varadkar got one over on them is merely politics; their sense he got one over on the agreement is warranted and leaves resentment it would be foolish to ignore. Brexit was bound to cause damage, however, and Ireland had to fight its corner. The taoiseach achieved his negotiating objective, London and the DUP have grudgingly accepted it and Stormont has been restored. The international Troubles legacy case the Irish government announced in December is a less excusable fight with Britain. Varadkar is not solely to blame: Ireland’s two other coalition leaders and indeed every party leader in the UK and Ireland, apart from the British prime minister, opposes the UK’s Troubles amnesty legislation. But challenging it in the European Court of Human Rights is an unusually combative response. It is hypocritical when Ireland has operated a similar de facto amnesty for two decades, as the former Irish justice minister Michael McDowell confirmed in 2021. This has particularly antagonised unionists. British ministers were aghast when Ireland announced its case at a critical juncture of Stormont talks. While the European court has a tight deadline for applications, it is debatable if this applies in interstate cases. The episode indicates an inconsistent carelessness with Northern Ireland. Inconsistency has been a wider fault with Varadkar’s time in office. He campaigned to be Fine Gael leader in 2017 by promising a government “for people who get up early in the morning”, a phrase denounced by left-wing opponents as a Thatcherite outrage. He is stepping down after losing two referendums on behalf of what in Britain would be called the woke blob. If there were a coherent philosophy behind this spread of views, it was not one the taoiseach communicated effectively. Nobody in the future will be denounced for Varadkarism, a term that appeared briefly in the newspapers in 2017 and was scarcely heard again. Awkward communication may lie at the heart of the taoiseach’s difficulties, with unionists and everyone else. He has been a rather enigmatic figure, although not by design. Informed observers say he wanted a relaxed rapport with the public; his initial social media use and photo opportunities back this up, but it was not to be and that was not entirely to his detriment. If familiarity breeds contempt, distance conveys gravitas. One reason historians will be kind to Varadkar is that he has left them the intriguing puzzle of figuring him out. Load-Date: March 25, 2024  End of Document
