   Honesty must be Bailey's watchword when it comes to Brexit and inflation The Herald (Glasgow) July 7, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Newsquest Media Group All Rights Reserved  Section: Pg. 22 Length: 1142 words Byline: D CMS  Body   IT was difficult to know quite what to think when the Bank of England's governor appeared to very deliberately play down Brexit as a factor in the UK's inflation crisis last week. Andrew Bailey's comments were interpreted in some quarters as a response to predecessor Mark Carney, who has surely quite rightly highlighted the major impact of the ruling Conservatives' hard Brexit on inflation. It seemed a most curious stance by Mr Bailey, and at times you wonder if the bank governor has lost the plot in the fight against inflation. The governor clearly has a very difficult job right now. Inflation in the UK is the highest among the Group of Seven leading industrialised nations. And households and businesses are being hammered by very sharp rises in interest rates from the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). UK base rates have already been hiked from 0.1% in December 2021 to 5%, and economists and financial markets are expecting a further significant rise this cycle. Financial markets were yesterday pricing in base rates of 6.5% by early next year. So what did Mr Bailey have to say about the causes of UK inflation? Well, the Bank Governor does appear to believe tightness in the labour market is a factor. However, somewhat bafflingly, he appears not to see a major Brexit effect here. Industry leaders and companies across a raft of sectors in Scotland and elsewhere in the UK have highlighted the part which Brexit has played in fuelling the UK's skills and labour shortages crisis. The labour market woe, they have noted, has arisen in large part from the clampdown on immigration from European Economic Area countries to the UK following the Tories' hard exit from the European single market at the end of 2020. Veteran hotelier Paddy Crerar told The Herald in February 2022 that the UK had "been placed in an impossible situation by what seemed to be a xenophobic drive" to take the country out of the European Union and "deny access to a much-needed labour force". The industry veteran who, unlike Mr Bailey, has been able to see the effects of Brexit on the Scottish hospitality sector and its labour force close up, declared at that stage: "I find myself more furious by the day on how predictably short-sighted it was for those who chose to ignore simple obvious facts and the inescapable consequences of the 'get Brexit done' decision to halt migration." Mr Crerar, who sold his Crerar Hotels business to a joint venture between Blantyre Capital and operating partner Fairtree Hotel Investments earlier this year, added: "There never was a position, certainly in Scotland, where EU workers were taking jobs or undercutting the wages of the indigenous UK labour pool. "The fact was, and remains, that we simply don't have enough people in our country for the work that needs done without immigration." Mr Crerar is absolutely right. Brexit has had a very big part in the tightness in the UK labour market, whether Mr Bailey thinks so or wants to say so or not. As the veteran hotelier and many others including Scottish Engineering Chief Executive Paul Sheerin have set out the effects of Brexit on employers' ability or otherwise to find skills and labour, the ruling Conservatives at Westminster have kept their heads firmly in the sand. They have clung on to their hard Brexit and anti-immigration ideology even as the inevitable effects on the economy and, yes absolutely, on inflation have become clear. The labour force woe, as well as driving up pay costs in sometimes undesirable ways, also limits the capacity of the economy, which is not a good thing either from an inflationary perspective. Mr Bailey, however, seems to prefer to focus on the impact of the Covid pandemic on the labour market. This is a factor, too, and there has been a rise in the number of economically inactive people, notably among over-50s. However, this would surely make free movement of people between the UK and EEA even more important in enabling the UK labour market to function properly and in a way which did not bring undesirable inflationary pressures, given it would allow those now unable to find staff to fill jobs. Reflecting on the labour market situation in the context of the UK's high inflation rate, Mr Bailey said: "I think more of it is to do with the response to Covid, frankly. We saw people come out of the labour force in Covid, other countries tended to see that reverse more quickly and more strongly than we've seen in the UK." It might be worth observing that other countries also did not leave the EU. Mr Carney seems much more on the ball in terms of what is going on here. Reflecting on his time at the helm of the Bank of England, Mr Carney said last month: "We laid out in advance of Brexit that this will be a negative supply shock for a period of time and the consequence of that will be a weaker pound, higher inflation and weaker growth. And the central bank will need to lean against that. "Now that's exactly what's happened. It's happened in coincidence with other factors, but it is a unique aspect of the economic adjustment that's going on here." He added: "There's no joy in saying 'we told you so' because people are having to live with that reality." This all comes across as eminently sensible. It seems particularly important right now that Mr Bailey and the other eight members of the MPC are fully appraised of the forces that are affecting inflation as they mull crucial decisions on interest rates. The Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics updated its analysis of the impact of Brexit on food prices in May, so that might be helpful for MPC members as well. The May paper from Jan David Bakker, Nikhil Datta, Richard Davies and Josh De Lyon observed: "The cost of Brexit to each household now stands at £250 when only considering the impacts on food since December 2019. This aggregates up to £6.95 billion overall for UK households. "The observed price increases of products more exposed to Brexit are not correlated with macro events which could be associated with inflationary pressures such as Covid lockdowns or the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Furthermore, the fact that the results are driven entirely by products with high NTBs [non-tariff barriers] imported from the EU offers strong evidence that Brexit is the driving force behind these effects." This is a compelling analysis indeed. And it lays out a huge effect, caused clearly by Brexit. It is high time we saw current senior figures at the Bank of England focus a lot more on the Brexit effects, like former governor Mr Carney. Of course, it is easy to see why the Conservatives do not want to talk about these effects, for political reasons. However, the Bank of England has independence in setting monetary policy and must absolutely not shy away from highlighting the effects of what government does on the economy. Load-Date: July 7, 2023  End of Document
