   Immigration was not the reason for Brexit, just the excuse for it The National (Scotland) December 1, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 638 words Byline: Readers of The National Body   ISN-T Joanna Cherry right to highlight how the blue Tories have backed themselves into a corner over the deplorable Rwanda expatriation scheme; the result of opportunist policy to attract votes and flawed thinking for the last two to 13 years of this failing government-s tenure (UK can no longer complain about foreign courts after Rwanda ruling, Nov 24). I can-t help feeling that any failure over migration within the EU, responsibility for which lies at the door of the EU itself, was the problem that was used to encourage Brexit. READ MORE: SNP MP urges Tories to cut red tape for children fleeing Sudan war Any country with population movement within its borders would make regional financial provision to accommodate it, and provide the necessary infrastructure. The EU failed, to the point where, on a simple level, the hard of thinking were encouraged to believe our social benefits were being paid to immigrant Europeans who were sending them to relatives in their home country. And this was used as the excuse for the Brexit that has devastated Britain on the blue Tories- watch. But immigration is only the excuse. Cameron was going to contain it in 2010, but even after Brexit it has continued apace. We should not lose sight of the fact that immigration was not the reason for Brexit, just the cudgel used by the wealthy vested interests, aided and abetted by the mainstream media-s propagandising, to convince the hard of thinking that the EU and freedom of movement were the cause of their economic problems and their new imperative. And just enough of them were persuaded to vote for the economic and political disaster that ensued with Brexit. READ MORE: Narratives around homelessness need a radical shift in perspective As for what will red Tory Labour do? Don-t we know they-ll blame the blue Tories for 13 years of misrule, and then duck the issue? And they-ll continue to make the same trade deals, where every deal will have either a freedom-of-movement clause or at least a generous quota which negates the very reason we Brexited in the first place. Or they could realise the immigration policy folly, strike a deal with the EU and get back to the immigration strategy that we know worked, which provided the staff for our depleted NHS, which stimulated growth in our economy and which filled the now millions of jobs our Tory-controlled isolationist economy has failed to fill. The upshot is, both red and blue Tories are slugging it out with the same six-shooter, and both firing the same blanks. Isn-t this just another example of policy that our Scottish Government should be shouting from the roof tops is failing Scotland, and the solution - the only solution - is an independent Scotland pursuing the policies needed to satisfy our immigration needs, and not those of a UK in the control of oligarchs working their own vested interest to harvest cash to inflate their personal wealth? An independent Scotland would be fairer for all Scots, and those we need to come here and invest their skills and lives to build the new, better Scotland. Jim Taylor Edinburgh MICHAEL Russell is missing the main target for the non-celebration of St Andrew-s Day which the government has control over, which is education (St Andrew-s Day is still a work in progress in wider Scottish society, Nov 25). If you want it to be recognised as a public holiday, do it through the schools. Increase awareness of St Andrew and St Andrew-s Day by educating schoolchildren about them and, most importantly, give them a day off school. If children have a day off, their parents- attitudes will become more focused on it in many ways, requesting time off work in some cases, which will bring it to the attention of their employers. If you want to celebrate a holiday then give people time off work - it is simple. Peter McLaughlin Edinburgh Load-Date: December 1, 2023  End of Document
