   Irish food exports face Brexit test next month   Irish Examiner December 12, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Landmark Digital Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 15 Length: 513 words Byline: Eamon Quinn Body   The Irish argi-food industry faces the first wave of new Brexit rules as all food exports to the key British market will be documented before embarkation at British ports next month, and with checks at border posts still slated from April, an expert has warned. Aidan Flynn, chief executive at business group, Freight Transport Associ ation Ireland, whose members are at the front line of the long-delayed Brexit rules, said the risks to supply chains and for food suppliers selling across the Irish Sea have risen significantly. The European Union, after the Brexit transition period two years ago, had imposed its customs and declaration checks, including on the island of Ireland, for all goods coming from Britain, but London had delayed impos ing reciprocal checks on imports from the EU coming into Britain. The British government, including under the former Brexit opportunities minister and then business minister, Jacob Rees-Mogg, appeared to hesitate should its border checks at channel ports lead to further delays and further add to shortages and to the prices of fresh food in its supermarkets imported from the Continent and from Ireland. "They have now put a schedule in place for the likes of export health-certificate requirements from January 31 for medium- and high-risk agri-foods and each category of food product has a risk rating," Mr Flynn said. "It is going to be a big change for Irish exporters into GB, in particular, and they need to be ready for it to get the health certificates from computer systems at the Department of Agricul ture to meet the new demands," Mr Flynn said. Food products, which will be part of all the 75,000-odd codes linked to products likely to be carried by Irish trucks for export, will have to be pre-registered on computer databases. Without the IT certificates, food exports at British ports arriving from Ireland and the Continent won't get through. "After January, there are other deadlines, like in April, for the introduction of the requirement for physical checks on products of animal origin," but it looks likely the introduction of these checks, at the GB borders, of Irish goods will be further delayed, because the border posts at the key Holyhead port, as well as at Liverpool, have not been built yet, he said. However, from the end of January, hauliers carrying exports of many Irish food products bound for Britain will be halted from driving onto ferries at Irish ports without the IT certificates, he said. "All going well at Holyhead, there won't be delays. But the further rules for physical phytosanitary checks on the loads due in April look likely to be delayed, possibly by six months, because Britain doesn't have the physical infrastructure in place," Mr Flynn said. The Irish hauliers are concerned about the additional costs that will apply under the British rules. "The British market is massively important for the Irish agri-foods sector," Mr Flynn said. "A lot of exporters are also importers and there is a risk of apathy around these deadlines because late January looks like it will happen," he said. Load-Date: December 18, 2023  End of Document
