   ITV I'm A Celeb's Fred Sirieix confronts Nigel Farage in explosive 'Brexit' clash walesonline.co.uk November 21, 2023 Tuesday 9:36 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: TV; Version:1 Length: 536 words Byline: By, Charlotte Smith Highlight: First Dates star Fred Sirieix didn't hesitate when it came to quizzing the former politician on his Brexit tactics during a heated discussion Body   Things got heated in the I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out OF Here! campsite during last night's episode Nov 20 between Fred Sirieix and Nigel Farage. The pair clashed while discussing Brexit, with Fred slamming Nigel over his "shameful" Brexit campaign. Fans will recognise Fred from Channel 4's popular Frist Dates show, while ex politician Nigel currently works as a broadcaster. In 2006 to 2009, he was leader of the UK Independence Party, and leader of the Brexit Party from 2019 to 2021. Now, the two have headed into the Australian jungle to take part in this year's series -but it would seem they haven't gotten off to the best start. Within less than 48 hours, Fred didn't hold back quizzing the ex MP on his motivation for wanting the UK to leave Europe in 2016. Fred said the move has caused people to 'lose out' for no longer being a part of the EU, but Nigel insisted "they haven't lost out" -despite various issues emerging since the country's exit. The conversation began calmly, and kicked off with fellow campmates Josie Gibson and Danielle Harold asking Nigel what it was like working with former Prime Minister Boris Johnson. "Entertaining... in small doses. [He's] surprisingly introverted. You see this big act, fluffing the hair... surprising." He told them. "I think he's one of the most disorganised human beings that possibly ever lived. The whole thing's bloody chaos. Shambles."  Tensions quickly rose however when Fred jumped in to ask: "What's the benefit of Brexit then If you are an average person from Britain, what's the benefit" Nigel hit back: "To know that we're independent, we stand on our own two feet in the world." Fred replied: "Brexit was about immigration, I remember your poster. I thought it was shameful what you did Nigel. Shameful." Nigel told him: "Sadly, sadly it was absolutely true. It was a poster showing mass young men moving illegally across borders." Fred added: "But it was about demonising migrants." Nigel clapped back: "No it wasn't. In your view it was, but it wasn't." Fred then insisted: "It's not only just my view." Nigel went on to say: "Brexit is about one thing and one thing only; being self-governing. We're in charge. We can get it right, we can make an absolute mess of it but we're in charge and the people who make those decisions we can hire and fire at elections where they have real power." Fred concluded: "I think the average person in the UK has lost out because of what you've done, partly done." Farage disagreed, saying: "They haven't lost out." Following the heated exchange, Fred headed to the Bush Telegraph, where he told viewers: "Look, Nigel Farage is in the jungle with me. We're bound to have this conversation. At the end of the day nothing is going to change, Nigel believes what he believes, I believe what I believe. It was only a matter of time." It comes as I'm A Celeb viewing rates have massively dropped this year compared to last year. The first episode of 2023's season pulled in an average of seven million -down two million from 2022's figures and the lowest launch rating since series one in 2002. Many fans have taken to X, formerly known as Twitter, to admit they are boycotting the show this year due to Nigel's appearance.  Load-Date: November 21, 2023  End of Document
