   Kemi: Ditch the doom and gloom ...our businesses are now thriving; BREXIT BRITAIN'S OVERSEAS TRADE HITS £868 BILLION EXCLUSIVE Scottish Express December 14, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 685 words Byline: Katie Harris Body   TRADE Secretary Kemi Badenoch has declared that the Government's "export success stories" are allowing Brexit Britain's trade to boom. Official figures have revealed an 8% hike in overseas trading in 2023 with sales hitting £868billion annually. Ms Badenoch said the £62billion total year-on-year increase in current prices has proved the EU exit naysayers are wrong. Writing for the Daily Express, she said: "Let's ditch the doom and gloom - British businesses are thriving and that's something to celebrate. The figures show the Government's work signing new trade deals, knocking down trade barriers and promoting British businesses across the globe is working - with our services industries reaching record export levels never seen before. "From insurance to advertising, travel services to telecoms, these export success stories are helping to grow the economy, create jobs and boost prosperity." Services exports were at record levels and up more than 6%, adjusted for inflation, in the year to October 2023, according to the Office for National Statistics. The ONS records show the yearly increase at £62billion, though, once adjusted for inflation and excluding precious metals, it falls to £14billion. Tory MPs said the figures defy dire warnings from critics about the impact of Brexit. Dr Liam Fox, the former International Trade Secretary, said it was "great news for British businesses and jobs, terrible news for those who predicted our trade would collapse after Brexit". Ex-Business Secretary Sir Jacob Rees-Mogg added: "Brexit encourages us to look beyond the narrow European sphere and this growth in exports will get a further boost from our new free trade deals." Conservative MP Marco Longhi, who is the trade envoy to Brazil, said: "Increasing our exports means more jobs and more secure jobs. "An increase of £62billion is huge and it underlines the importance of Brexit which is now delivering. "In Brazil alone we have increased exports by about a third. This would not have been possible if still shackled to the EU. Global Britain is working and our export data proves it resoundingly." Rishi Sunak was also keen to bang the drum for the economy at yesterday's Prime Minister's questions. It comes as Britain has signed trade agreements with more than 70 countries since leaving the EU. Earlier this year, the UK joined the Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership in the biggest post-Brexit deal to date. It made Britain the first new member of the Indo-Pacific trade bloc since it was formed and the only European nation to be part of the club which gives access to some of the fastest-growing markets in the world. Meanwhile, the first agreements negotiated from scratch with Australia and New Zealand came into force in May. Last month a trade deal was signed with Florida, bringing the total number of pacts with US states to seven, and a bumper arrangement with India is expected imminently. The UK fired the starting gun on talks for a new agreement with South Korea in November, while there will be negotiations with Turkey on an updated tie-up. A landmark report by the Institute for Economic Affairs think tank last month found both goods and services exports rose after Brexit. In other wins, Japanese car giant Nissan announced last month it will invest £2billion at its Sunderland plant. It came after Jaguar Land Rover-owner Tata confirmed plans to invest £4billion in a huge UK factory in Somerset. Meanwhile, Britain has leapfrogged France to become the world's eighthbiggest manufacturer. And the UK unveiled £29.5billion of foreign investment at the Global Investment Summit at Hampton Court Palace last month. Marco Forgione, director general of the Institute of Export and International Trade, said it is "clear there is a real appetite in overseas markets for UK goods, products and services". He added: "All the evidence shows that firms who trade internationally grow faster, hire more people and are more resilient - which is good news for them and for the wider British economy." OPINION: PAGE 10 'Export success stories are helping grow the economy and creating jobs' Graphic    Export bonanza... Kemi BadenochRoaring trade... Rishi Sunak sells success at PMQsPictures: JESSICA TAYLOR/UK PARLIAMENT Load-Date: December 14, 2023  End of Document
