   Labour by-election candidate branded 'out of touch' over Brexit stance The National (Scotland) August 10, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 548 words Byline: Abbi Garton-Crosbie Body   MICHAEL Shanks has been branded -out of touch- for his stance on Brexit after stating that rejoining the EU is -not a question for now-. The Labour candidate for the Westminster by-election in Rutherglen and Hamilton West made the comments in an interview with the Daily Record, where he said he was not -against- rejoining the EU. Shanks insisted that he had not changed his -principles- over the bloc, but at the same time said it was not the right time for a debate on the issue. READ MORE: Nicola Sturgeon slams Scottish media for coverage of credit cards row Previously, Shanks resigned from the Labour party over its stance on Brexit. The SNP-s candidate for the hotly contested seat, councillor Katy Loudon, branded Shanks -all over the place- with his stance on Brexit, and said it was -insulting- to dismiss the impact of leaving the EU on families in the area. It comes as SNP MP Alyn Smith challenged Keir Starmer and Anas Sarwar to admit they had -ditched their principles by backing Brexit-. In the interview with the Record, Shanks (pictured above) said: -I think it's not a question for just now, but I still see the UK as having a place in the European Union. "So yes, if it got to a point where there was clearly a public appetite for the conversation again, I wouldn't be against us rejoining the European Union. Of course not. -Because I have not changed my principles or the idea that the European project is good for all of us.- -READ MORE: Joanna Cherry dismisses claim she said Greens deal should be 'ripped up' Loudon blasted the comments on social media, writing: -All over the place, and ridiculously out of touch. -This constituency, and Scotland, overwhelmingly voted Remain, and the vast majority want to rejoin. "While Starmer and Labour's position becomes more extreme, only @theSNP offers a way of escaping the disaster that is Brexit.- The South Lanarkshire councillor added that Brexit had an -extremely personal and upsetting- impact on her extended family, adding: -It is insulting in the extreme to say -this is not a question for just now- when people here are living through the consequences.- Shanks previously quit Labour in 2019 stating the party had a -bankrupt- approach to membership of the EU and the -impact it will have on the poorest people across the UK-. Labour under Starmer have now embraced Brexit and ruled out any return to the EU, the single market or freedom of movement. Smith, the SNP-s EU accession spokesperson, said: "Brexit has been a disaster for Scotland - costing us billions of pounds, increasing the cost of living and inflicting long-term damage to our economy and NHS. -READ MORE: SNP's Keith Brown hits out at BBC reporting on credit card row "The SNP is the only party offering Scotland an escape from Brexit with independence - and a route back to EU prosperity. -In contrast, Sir Keir Starmer has sold Scotland out by backing Brexit and admitting there's no going back to the EU under the pro-Brexit Labour Party.- Smith accused Shanks of -hypocrisy- over his previous comments regarding Brexit and said he was -simply wrong- stating that there was no appetite in Scotland to rejoin the EU. "At the next election, voting SNP is the only way to secure independence, escape Brexit and build a wealthier, fairer future in the EU,- he added. Load-Date: August 10, 2023  End of Document
