   Labour's U-turns prove how good Tory policies are Sunday Express March 31, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 709 words Byline: Jake Berry Body   THE LATEST stop on Labour's Great Electoral Con Roadshow pulled up in Dudley this week, with Angela Rayner and Sir Keir Starmer launching their local elections campaign. The cornerstone of their offer is now Levelling Up. Sunday Express readers will remember that this policy was one championed by Boris Johnson. In fact, many link his vision for transforming leftbehind towns and communities as the one policy, along with Brexit, that propelled him into No 10. Across Britain, scores of working-class former Labour-voting areas, that had been taken for granted for years by that party, backed Boris's vision for Britain. Levelling Up was derided by the Labour Party, as Keir and his cronies battled to install Jeremy Corbyn as Prime Minister. But now, in another screeching handbrake turn, the Labour leader seeks to position himself as the standard bearer of Levelling Up. In another flip-flop, his deputy Angela Rayner channels Brexit - which Starmer opposed - by saying she wants to "take back control". And most ridiculously of all, shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves now claims to be a fan of one of Britain's greatest ever Prime Ministers, Margaret Thatcher. I am a fan of Brexit, Levelling Up and Margaret Thatcher. In fact, I wrote most of the Government's Levelling Up policy. As Pablo Picasso once put it, "good artists copy, great artists steal" - but it's clear to me that Keir Starmer is neither. He's a con artist who seeks to take Sunday Express readers for fools. HOLBORN and St Pancras MP Keir Starmer, as "MP for two tube stations", is the embodiment of the metropolitan man. His only interest in the North is how many votes he can get out of it and this attempt at political cross dressing will not dupe anyone. Let's look at his record. Keir started off believing in the abolition of the monarchy, and now apparently supports it. He backed Jeremy Corbyn to be Prime Minister, and now claims to have "changed the party". He supported a second referendum but now says he believes in Brexit. Now he's praising Boris Johnson, having previously accused Tory MPs who supported him of not having "a shred of dignity". Do they take us for mugs? Regarding the shadow chancellor's revelation, this is the same Margaret Thatcher who had her funeral picketed by leftie protesters that most likely had Labour membership cards in their pockets, and who has been widely vilified by Labour politicians over the last 35 years. I'm always delighted to see people sharing thinking on her political philosophy. Yet something tells me that Rachel Reeves, along with Starmer, Rayner and shadow foreign secretary David Lammy, who have all praised Thatcher in recent months, do not believe in her policies but seek to use them for cynical political gain. Angela Rayner wants us to believe she will steer a "Take Back Control Bill" through Parliament in the first few months of a Labour Government. While she may be hoping her neighbours struggle to remember which of her two homes she actually lived in before entering parliament, you don't need a long memory to recall Labour's effort to overturn Brexit. Time and again, Keir Starmer's team say one thing, only to change their opinion when it suits them. From Remainer to Brexiteer, Trotskyite to Thatcherite, from North London Boy to Northerner, do not be fooled by them. All of this should be a wake up call to Rishi, who I hope is listening; Starmer's apparent Damascene conversion to Conservatism shows Conservative policies are popular. WE MUST reinvigorate Levelling Up and talk about how it has improved people's lives all across the country. Let's take back control and prove that leaving the EU means we have a sovereign immigration system and stop the boats. And let's invoke Thatcher's taxcutting agenda, putting money back in the pockets of working people and backing British Business. Remember, you only get a Conservative Government by voting for one. It's time for the party to embrace core Conservative values again and deliver on our promise to Level Up Britain. We can only do this by stopping Starmer from walking up Downing Street as a wolf in Conservative clothing. ? Sir Jake Berry is MP for Rossendale and Darwen " Time and again Starmer's team say one thing, only to change their opinion when it suits them Graphic    THEY'RE LAUGHING AT US: Labour's Angela Rayner and Sir Keir Starmer Load-Date: March 31, 2024  End of Document
