   Lee Anderson tells Ursula von der Leyen to ‘shut up’ about Brexit telegraph.co.uk November 30, 2023 Thursday 12:36 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:5 Length: 285 words Byline: By Jack Maidment, Politics Live Blog Editor, James Crisp, Europe Editor Highlight: European Commission president has suggested younger generation can ‘fix’ mistake of Britain’s EU exit Body   Lee Anderson has told Ursula von der Leyen to “shut up” after the European Commission president urged young people to reverse Brexit. At an event in Brussels, Mrs von der Leyen suggested the UK could be on a path to rejoin the bloc.  She said “the direction of travel” was clear and suggested the younger generation could “fix” the mistake of Brexit. “First of all, thank God, with the Windsor agreement , we had a new beginning for old friends. Very important,” Mrs von der Leyen said at the event, hosted by the Politico website. “And then I must say, I keep telling my children, you have to fix it. We goofed it up. You have to fix it. So I think here, too, the direction of travel, my personal opinion is clear.” But Mr Anderson, the deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, told GB News: “So the generation that fixed the problems in Europe was my grandad’s generation. “He put a British Army uniform on… he went to fight the Nazis, he went all across North Africa, through Sicily, through Italy, seen some horrible things. That was the generation that fixed the problems in Europe. She needs to shut up.” Asked whether he believed the UK would rejoin the EU  in his lifetime, he said: “I hope not, because if we do I’m moving to Orkney isles.” On Wednesday, Mr Sunak’s official spokesman said the Prime Minister did not agree with Mrs von der Leyen  that future generations would have to fix Brexit. “It’s through our Brexit freedoms that we are, right now, considering how to further strengthen our migration system,” he said. “It is through our Brexit freedoms we are ensuring patients in the UK can get access to medicines faster, that there is improved animal welfare. That is very much what we are focused on.” Load-Date: November 30, 2023  End of Document
