   Less than a fifth of Leave voters view Brexit as success, new poll finds The National (Scotland) June 22, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 333 words Byline: Hamish Morrison Body   LESS than a fifth of Brexit voters believe it has been a success seven years on from the 2016 referendum, according to new polling. The findings, based on an online survey of 4005 UK adults from May 26 to June 2 and carried out by Public First for UK in a Changing Europe, show that just 18% of Leave voters believe Brexit has gone -well- or -very well-. Thirty per cent believe it has -neither turned out well or badly-, while 29% of Leave supporters think Brexit has had a negative economic impact on the UK. According to the polling, 72% of Leave voters want to stop talking about Brexit. Of Leave supporters currently unhappy with how Brexit has turned out, 70% believe it could have gone well while 18% feel the decision to leave the EU could only have turned out badly. Nearly half of that group believe Brexit could have been made to work by politicians but elected representatives did not try to make it succeed. Anand Menon, director of UK in a Changing Europe, said: -While very few people think Brexit is going well, a large number of Leavers also believe it is still too soon to make a definitive judgment. READ MORE: Fury as Question Time set for Brexit special - with only Leave voters in the audience -Many Leave voters believe Brexit has not been a success because politicians have let them down. The danger is that this will lead to an erosion of faith in politics and politicians.- The figures show that 88% of Leave voters who feel Brexit has gone badly now say they have -lost faith- in UK politicians, with 75% of all those surveyed - regardless of how they voted in 2016 - feeling the same way. Rachel Wolf, from Public First, said: -Few think Brexit has gone well, but was that inevitable? Leave voters, by and large, don-t think so. -People like [Nigel] Farage are playing into a more general view that politicians messed it up. "On the other hand, people are not exactly keen to keep talking about Brexit. -Get Brexit done- - i.e. make it go away and stop talking about it - still works.- Load-Date: July 21, 2023  End of Document
