   Lib Dems must lead the way on blunting Brexit; The damage from leaving the EU is growing and opposition parties need to start talking frankly The Times (London) September 25, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 24 Length: 922 words Byline: Edward Lucas Body   My native corner of Somerset is paying the price of Brexit. For Avon Bulbs, it's the lost snowdrop market in Germany. Up the road, the Burrow Hill cider-brandy distillery can't import the old sherry barrels it needs from Spain. The nearby smokery has stopped shipping its succulent eels and fish to the EU. All tell the same story: form-filling and delays that make once-frictionless trade impossibly slow and costly for small companies. These stories writ large are the theme of a new book by Peter Foster of the Financial Times, What Went Wrong with Brexit: and What We Can Do About It. He highlights the central "red tape" fallacy behind the Leave case: that European bureaucracy was stifling British business and that sovereignty required escape from it. A better analogy, he argues, is football: rules are what makes the game possible. Sometimes there may be a better game elsewhere - but so far, the costs of erecting barriers with our biggest neighbouring market outweigh the gains from faraway trade deals by about 20 to one. Small firms left the pitch first. The LSE's Centre for Economic Performance found that the number of UK-EU export relationships fell by a third after the Brexit trade deal in January 2021. Now, bigger businesses are finding themselves on the sidelines too. Simply following EU rules is not enough. As members, we were trusted to implement them. Outside, we must demonstrate compliance, meaning wodges of paperwork. Foreign investors flinch at that. Britain used to be an attractive English-speaking springboard into the huge EU market. Now we are a backwater, losing our place in vital high-value manufacturing supply chains. This is miserable for those who see years of effort wasted. The economic cost hits us all, with lower productivity, investment, incomes and tax revenues. The public seems to realise this more clearly than the politicians. Opinion polls show a two-to-one majority regrets Brexit. But no mainstream national political party speaks for them. For the Conservatives, any Brexit backtracking is betrayal. Like diehard communists, they argue that the only flaw in the great revolutionary idea was the timid way it was implemented. The Labour Party is little better. It accepts Boris Johnson's half-baked hard Brexit as irreversible. True, Sir Keir Starmer has lately talked of renegotiating the deal with Brussels and halting any further divergence from EU rules. But Labour also highlights three red lines, ruling out rejoining the single market and the customs union, let alone the EU. This ambiguity may work in electoral terms. Pro-European voters will see the promises of tweaks and friendly talk as better than nothing, while the red lines reassure the Leave voters who switched to the "get Brexit done" Tories in 2019 that the referendum result is being respected. But as a policy, it is divorced from reality: more of the "cakeism" and magical thinking that has bedevilled our discussion of Europe since 2016. As the think tank UK in a Changing Europe outlines in a new report, using the scheduled review of the Trade and Co-operation Agreement in 2026 to make serious changes in our relationship with Europe will be hard. The EU expects the discussions to be brief, technical and minimalist. The main reason is that it's not only about us. Decisionmakers on the Continent are no longer bothered by Brexit. That "thin" (ie inadequate) deal we negotiated has hurt us far more than it has hurt the EU. The EU is bigger and richer than we are. It is busy with issues such as Ukraine and migration. Moreover, Johnson and Liz Truss trashed our reputation. Before European leaders invest time and political capital in improving ties with Britain, they will need to be sure that our post-imperial psychodrama is over for good. That will take a couple of general elections. Yet there is no time to waste. What Foster calls the "slow puncture" of Brexit is compounding the damage with every day that passes. Britain will need to offer a big incentive to change this dismal outlook. Luckily, we have one: defence. The Ukraine war has highlighted Europe's strategic predicament, the product of decades of underspending after the end of the Cold War. The prospect of another Trump presidency accentuates the mess. Wholehearted support for European security (and the concomitant abandonment of the more exotic aspects of our Indo- Pacific ambitions) would instantly put us at the heart of discussions about Europe's future. That will help to strike a political bargain about restoring economic ties. But we will still have to accept that whereas we were once rule-makers, in future we will be rule-takers in a game where the European Court of Justice is the referee. These trade-offs are hard but, as in Northern Ireland, that does not mean they can't be done. With "rejoin" now a distant ambition for even the most fervent Europhiles - "off the table", in the words of the Lib Dem leader Sir Ed Davey - we can build a broader consensus about practicalities. Indeed, the leaders in making this argument should be the Lib Dems. Unlike Labour, my party (I am a parliamentary candidate in central London) has a coherent stance on Europe: rebuilding political, economic and cultural ties as far and fast as possible. So far, Davey's leadership has played down this policy in the hope (only modestly successful) of broadening its appeal. As the election nears, and the anti-Brexit sentiment solidifies, highlighting it may look more attractive. For the Conservatives, any backtracking is viewed as betrayal Load-Date: September 25, 2023  End of Document
