   Listen to voters, PM, or you will be swept away Sunday Express February 18, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: EDITORIAL; OPINION, COLUMNS; Pg. 14 Length: 759 words Byline: Matthew Goodwin Body   THERE is a new third force in British politics. That's the key message from last week's shocking byelections. In Kingswood, a pro-Brexit seat held by the Tories since 2010, the Conservative MP was not only turfed out by Labour but forced to watch Reform UK leapfrog the others to finish third, with 10.4 per cent of the vote. A few hours later, the Conservatives were again demolished by Labour in the even more strongly pro-Brexit seat of Wellingborough, which they have held since 2005. They suffered the sharpest drop in support for a governing party at a by-election in Britain's entire post-war history. Again, Reform UK came third, with 13 per cent of the vote, more than enough to establish themselves as the main alternative to the big two parties. And these are not the only reasons for Reform leader Richard Tice and honorary chairman Nigel Farage to smile. In the national polls, too, their tiny party is now clearly on the rise. Last week, amid the revelation that just 1.3 per cent of illegal migrants who have entered on small boats have been removed from Britain, and the depressing news that the country has now entered recession, Reform UK averaged 10 per cent in the polls. Look closely and you'll find it is attracting one in four people who voted for Boris Johnson and the Tories in 2019, and one in four of those who voted for Brexit. Much like supporters of Ukip and the Brexit Party, many are working-class and older Brits who live outside London and the major cities. Most are also ex-Tories. For every Labour or Lib Dem voter who has defected to Reform, there are about five disillusioned ex-Tories, who clearly feel let down by Rishi Sunak and what his party has delivered since Brexit. These are people who have looked on with anger, shock and resentment.They feel betrayed. The Tories promised to lower net migration, only to put it on steroids. They said they'd control Britain's borders only to lose control, allowing 112,000 people to enter illegally. While the Tories say Britain is once again a sovereign, self-governing nation they then refuse to leave the European Convention on Human Rights or anything else that will allow us to protect our own territory and deport dangerous foreign criminals and convicted sex offenders. They blame much that has gone wrong on Labour yet refuse to use their big majority to reform key pieces of New Labour legislation, like the Human Rights Act and the Equalities Act. And while the Tories promised a post-Brexit economy shaped around much less but high-skill migration, as we saw with the new economic data last week they've given us the complete opposite. One reason we are in recession is because our economy was flooded with hundreds of thousands of low-skill, low-wage migrant workers who often take more out of the economy than they put in. Instead of building a dynamic, productive and innovative economy, the Government has doubled down on a "Deliveroo economy", with cheap labour, low productivity and the highest tax burden in decades. Is it any wonder people are now abandoning the party in droves? But the rise of Reform UK is not just about disillusionment with the Tories. Reform's new army of followers also feel deeply unhappy with how our national life has been reshaped around the liberal tastes, priorities and lifestyles of the London-based, exam-passing classes. They're unhappy about the obsession with mass immigration, "diversity" and net-zero policies. And the obsession with prioritising the rights of illegal migrants over controlling our borders and keeping people safe. The longer these concerns remain unaddressed, the better Reform will do. This is the simple, uncomfortable reality now facing the Tories. IGNORE the wishes of your voters, treat them with contempt, promise them one thing and give them the opposite and they will turn away and vote for somebody else. With an election rapidly approaching, the only option facing Rishi Sunak is to reconnect with these voters - and fast. Give them what they want, PM. Outline a serious roadmap for dramatically reducing legal immigration, regaining control of our borders and transforming us into a genuinely sovereign, self-governing nation. Because if you don't, then last week's by-elections show us what's about to happen. Mr Sunak and the Tories will suffer an enormous, historic defeat, worse even than 1997, and will then have all the time in the world to think about how they lost and irritated so many of their own supporters. " Sunak may soon have all the time in the world to think about how they lost their support Graphic    SURGE: Reform's Richard Tice at the Wellingborough count centre Picture: LEON NEAL/GETTY Load-Date: February 18, 2024  End of Document
