   Mayor of London denounces cost of Brexit and calls for rapprochement with EU CE Noticias Financieras English January 11, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 315 words Body   The Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, called on the United Kingdom on Thursday (11) to strengthen ties with the European Union and accused Brexit of having cost the British economy tens of billions of pounds sterling. In a statement, the Labour mayor stressed the need to establish "a closer relationship with the EU" and assured that a new agreement would "make the economy more dynamic and help raise living standards for Britons". This position contrasts with the resistance of the main political parties, including his own, to mention the consequences of the 2016 referendum, which approved leaving the EU, just a few months before the parliamentary elections for which Labour is expected to win over Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's Conservatives. "We have to be honest, Brexit is not a peripheral concern that we can leave in the past. It's a key factor in the cost of living crisis" caused by inflation, insisted Sadiq Khan, who is running for a third term in May's municipal elections. According to a study commissioned from Cambridge Econometrics by the Mayor of London, Brexit cost the British economy 140 billion pounds (178 billion dollars or 870 billion reais), of which 30 billion pounds (186 billion reais) affected the capital. Cambridge Econometrics estimates that Brexit, formalized in 2020, has caused the loss of two million jobs in the country, 300,000 of them in London. According to the same data, the economic losses for the UK will reach 300 billion pounds (381 billion dollars or 1.8 trillion reais) by 2035 if measures to reverse the trend are not taken. A spokesperson for Sunak responded to Khan, stating that British economic activity has "experienced faster growth" than Italy and Germany since 2016. The government also highlights the opportunities opened up by leaving the European Union, such as the free trade agreement with Australia or the Transpacific Trade Association.  Load-Date: January 12, 2024  End of Document
