   Millions of expats given vote by Tories ‘will punish party for Brexit’ thetimes.co.uk January 29, 2024 Monday 12:01 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 1195 words Byline: Matt Dathan, Home Affairs Editor Highlight: Labour and Liberal Democrats expected to reap benefit from franchise rule changes and frustration over visa restrictions Body   Labour’s vote will be boosted by a change in voting rules introduced by the Conservative government that will enfranchise an extra two million British expats at the next general election, according to academic research. Rules came into effect on January 16 allowing all British citizens living abroad to register to vote in a general election. Previously, people who left the UK more than 15 years ago lost this right but the Conservatives pledged to scrap the rule in their 2019 manifesto and enacted the policy through the Elections Act 2022. Labour opposed the rule change, but in an ironic twist, academics at the University of Sussex suggest the party will gain from it at the expense of the Conservatives. The Liberal Democrats are also likely to benefit, according to the research.  The government estimated that the changes would add up to 2.3 million extra voters to the electorate at the next election, which is expected to be held in the autumn. At present there are only about one million eligible voters among Britain’s expat community, according to the government’s research. About a third of British citizens living abroad are estimated to be in Europe. British citizens from abroad will cast their vote in the last constituency in which they resided in the UK and will be offered the opportunity to vote by proxy or postal vote. If they cannot provide proof of the address then an acquaintance can “attest” that they lived in a certain constituency. This has led to fears that some voters may choose marginal constituencies where their vote is most valuable. More than 21,000 British people living abroad have already registered to vote since the electoral registration rules came into effect a fortnight ago. Dr Susan Collard, from the University of Sussex, said there was no evidence to suggest that voting intention among Britain’s expat community had changed since she carried out a 2020 study into the potential impact of the changes along with her colleague Professor Paul Webb. The study included surveys of more than 3,200 British expats living in Europe — the main bulk of overseas voters who participate in UK elections — immediately after the last general election in 2019. Collard and Webb compared voting intention with expats living in Europe in the 2015 general election and found that the Conservatives’ share of overseas votes fell by two thirds between the two elections. The combined vote share for Labour and the Liberal Democrats rose from 56 per cent in 2015 to 85 per cent in 2019. Collard said the evidence suggested that the voting intention of British citizens living outside the EU was not “dissimilar” to their European counterparts. She told The Times: “Given the unpopularity of the Conservative Party in this country, I can’t see anything that they’ve done that would change the negative outlook for them based on the results of the data that we had.” She said that the main driver of the vote had been Brexit, adding: “They’re not forgetting. Many are still living in the consequences of Brexit so all I could say is there isn’t any evidence that the mood has changed among those voters.” British expats had traditionally been more likely to vote Tory. Collard said: “That is a stereotype that belongs to the 1980s, and the whole question of mobility in the EU has meant that going to live abroad is no longer posh people going to live in villas on the Mediterranean — it’s a hugely diverse population, they have hugely diverse views.” Sir John Curtice, professor of politics at Strathclyde University and  Britain’s leading polling expert , said it was ironic that changes introduced by the Conservatives were likely to damage them at the polls. He told The Times: “Whatever benefit the Conservatives might have gained in the past from enfranchisement of overseas British citizens — and, in truth, no one can be sure how far that has been the case — there must be question marks about how much support the party can now hope to garner from expatriates living in the European Union, many of whom could well feel that their lives have been made more difficult by Brexit.” The changes will also place a significant extra burden on council staff, returning officers and others responsible for delivering elections. Peter Stanyon, chief executive of the Association of Electoral Administrators, said the additional overseas voters added to other changes that staff must grapple with, which include the requirement for voters to show their identification at the ballot box for the first time at a general election and changes to the way in which ballot papers must be handled by staff. Fiona Godfrey, co-chairwoman of British in Europe (BIE), an organisation that supports and represents expats living on the continent, said those who have registered to vote so far are registering to vote in constituencies across the UK. A survey conducted by BIE last year found that voter turnout is likely to be high among those based in Europe. She said: “The next question is, will we vote in the next general election and upcoming by-elections in 2024? The evidence British in Europe has is yes, we will. In a survey carried out by BIE in 2023, 84 per cent of British citizen respondents living across 65 countries said they were very likely to vote at the next election if they got their voting rights back. “The survey also showed that British citizens abroad supported overseas constituencies and proportional representation. We are also going to be voting on the same policies as domestic voters: the NHS and social care provision for elderly relatives, the housing and cost of living crises experienced by our families living in the UK and issues such as the minimum income requirement that the government plans to double in the next year. We might not live in the UK but what happens there also very much affects us as well and we hope many more British citizens overseas will register to vote this year.” Sarah Douglas is one of those who will be affected by the changes. She moved to Italy in 2007 with her husband, so lost her right to vote 15 years later in 2022. Since Brexit she has also no longer had the right to vote in Italian elections. “For more than a year I was totally disenfranchised, a very scary feeling,” she said. Douglas said she particularly wanted to vote in the next general election due to changes the government is making to the minimum income requirements for British citizens who want to live in the UK with a foreign spouse and children. From the spring,  the minimum income threshold  will rise from £18,600 to £29,000.  She described this threshold as “an unjust policy which means I am unable to return to live in the UK with my Italian husband and my three British children”, adding: “Being unable to return to live in my home country is having a devastating impact on me and my family, and many others around the globe are in the same situation.  “It is essential that we have the right to a say in matters that have such a significant impact on our lives. It gives me a huge amount of comfort knowing that I will now be able to vote to make my voice known on this issue and any others that directly affect me and my family.” Load-Date: January 29, 2024  End of Document
