   More than half of Britons who supported Brexit believe that leaving the EU has been a failure CE Noticias Financieras English June 23, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 861 words Body   Weeks after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the number of Americans who claimed to have voted for him in 1960 was significantly higher than those who actually supported the Democrat. With Brexit, as the years go by, the opposite may end up happening. Seven years after the referendum that triggered the most painful divorce in Europe's recent history, more than half (52%) of those who supported that decision believe it was a failure, according to a survey commissioned by Uk in a Changing Europe, the organization that has kept the flame of Europeanism alive in the United Kingdom during all this time, from the polling firm Public First. Between May 26 and June 2, a selection of more than 4,000 leavers (from the verb leave, to leave or abandon; as Brexit supporters are known in political jargon) responded to an extensive list of questions whose answers, in the preliminary report released this week, draw a still diffuse but increasingly evident regret. If the word Brexit came from the combination Britain + Exit, the new buzzword is Bregret (Britain + Regret, i.e., United Kingdom + Regret). Alongside this survey data, tracking conducted over the last few years by the company YouGov reflects the highest percentage to date of Britons who would support the UK's rejoining the EU today: 58.2%. "Many of those who backed Brexit believe that its failure is due to politicians letting them down. The danger of thinking this way lies in the deterioration it entails with respect to trust in politicians or politics," noted Anand Menon, Professor of Politics at King's College and Director of UK in a Changing Europe. A close look at the guts of the UK in a Changing Europe survey shows how there is still among Eurosceptics a mixture of anger and denial of reality. Against 52% of those who clearly state that Brexit has ended badly or very badly, barely 10% defend that its outcome has been good or very good. In the middle is a curious group that is reminiscent, in its approach, of the excuses made by many of today's Conservative politicians, including the current Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak. Some 17% of respondents say the experiment has gone neither well nor badly, and another 15% say it is still too early to draw a conclusion one way or the other. Brexit excuses If the consensus of analysts, when Brexit was barely an imagined reality, already pointed out that its implementation could mean a loss of up to four percentage points in the British gross domestic product, the course of the years has been an added string of unpleasant surprises. The UK's current inflation rate of 8.7% has a lot to do with a decision that has taken away from the country's production capacity and competitiveness. The Sunak government had to devote considerable effort to redressing an inherited conflict, that of Northern Ireland's place in the post-Brexit era, which had poisoned the relationship between London and Brussels. And the Tories' famous promise to eradicate from the British legal system all the laws (more than 4,000) incorporated from the acquis communautaire for almost half a century proved to be mission impossible. Downing Street has barely eliminated 600, the most irrelevant ones, after admitting that carrying out this commitment would mean unmanageable chaos for administration and companies. The populist politician Nigel Farage, one of the main promoters of leaving the EU when he was at the head of the UKIP party, has been one of the first to openly admit the failure of Brexit. He said as much in mid-May, but brushed off any blame: "What all this has shown, I'm afraid, is that our politicians are as useless as the commissioners in Brussels. They have done a dismal job," Farage told the BBC. However, the Eurosceptics consulted by the Public First survey show a slightly more honest view of what has happened than Farage's. 62% of them admit that they have a slightly more honest view. Some 62% of them admit that "there was no way that Brexit could have worked", from the perspective of hindsight, compared to just 29% who think that "there was a way that Brexit could have worked, but it didn't". The distribution of blame is much more varied, and makes it impossible to draw a definitive conclusion. Fifty-one percent of those consulted believe that British politicians failed to reach a good agreement with Brussels. Curiously, 32% accuse the Conservative Party of never fully believing in Brexit and of not implementing it correctly. Another 32% say that the UK was too compliant with the EU's demands. And even 17% think that the Ukraine war drastically changed the landscape to the point of making it impossible for Brexit to work. The poll, in any case, is an exercise in gloom. Neither the Conservatives nor the Labour opposition want Brexit to return to the political debate. So do 72% of respondents. And above all, it is not the same to recognize that things are not going well as to admit one's own mistake: 84% of the Euroskeptics who have agreed to answer are still proud of the sense of their vote in the 2016 referendum. Follow all the international information on Facebook and Twitter, or in our weekly newsletter. Load-Date: June 24, 2023  End of Document
