   MP Kawczynski's fears of new EU deals 'by stealth' Shropshire Star March 18, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 MNA All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 17 Length: 536 words Byline: MARK MORRIS Body   Shrewsbury's MP Daniel Kawczynski was invited to hear an Indian delegation outline how they want to engage with Britain in a closer post-Brexit relationship. And while it was generally positive, it also raised the spectre of something that looms large in the minds of many Conservatives. For Mr Kawczynski and, he says, some of his Salopian constituents, the greatest apprehension among Tories revolves around the potential for what they term "stealth reintegration" with the European Union under a Labour government. In an exclusive interview with the Shropshire Star, he expressed deep concerns about the implications of a Labour victory in the next general election, particularly regarding post-Brexit trade agreements. Trade, Mr Kawczynski says, will eventually be the key benefit of Brexit as he explained how its of relevance to the people of Shrewsbury and Shropshire. The aforementioned CPTPP is of particular interest to him at the moment. The UK was recently accepted into the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), which is a free-trade agreement between 11 countries across the Indo-Pacific, including Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. It's no-joke trade deal either, with 99 per cent of current UK goods exports to CPTPP countries being eligible for zero tariffs. Many people and groups are opposed to this arrangement as it raises questions about food safety standards, but for those who support trade deals like this, the prospect of reintegration with the EU is an unpleasant one. It simply wouldn't be possible if Britain were a member of the European Union. The cost-of-living crisis - which Mr Kawczynski largely blames on shocks to the system such as the 2008 crisis, the Covid pandemic, the war in Ukraine and the 2023 energy crisis - is one of the main concerns amongst Shrewsbury voters going into the next election. And he argues that the only way peoples' living standards are going to improve is if Britain, as a country, increases its overall wealth. Shrewsbury voted in favour of Brexit by nearly 57 per cent on a relatively high turn out, and for many, it represented an opportunity for increased sovereignty and economic autonomy, but that is only one side of the coin. The other side is more populist and centres around immigration policy. Mr Kawczynski emphasised the importance of protecting what he sees as the hard-won gains of Brexit for his constituents - the ability to control our borders. He's currently demanding to know for example how hotels to house illegal immigrants are chosen by government, and is calling for an end to housing migrants in a particular hotel in Shrewsbury. He claims Tory MPs will remove every single Lords Amendment to the Rwanda Bill when it reenters the Commons next week. However, it's important to note that all this apprehension is not universal. While Mr Kawczynski and some Conservatives sound the alarm about the perceived risks of a Labour victory, others argue for a more nuanced approach. ? In the coming months, the Shropshire Star will be speaking to people and politicians on all sides of the most important debates for the county. Graphic    Brexiteers think trade and control over immigration policy are the key benefits Load-Date: March 18, 2024  End of Document
