   Nigel Farage: Mr. Brexit's predicament in the Australian jungle CE Noticias Financieras English November 27, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 669 words Body   WHO. Nigel Farage, a.k.a. Mr. Brexit, has broken the "I'm famous, get me out of here!" reality TV record with a (EURO)1.75 million contract. HOW. Influencer Nella Rose confronted him on camera. She called him "anti-immigrant" and told him, "Black people don't like you." WHY. "I'm a hero to some and a villain to millions," the Ukip founder admitted in the middle of the Australian jungle. Every year around this time, British politicians feel the call of the Australian jungle. Last year it was former pandemic minister Matt Hancock, who had to swallow kangaroo testicles and camel penis. This season it's the turn of Nigel Farage, better known as Mr. Brexit, who has been paid a whopping (EURO)1.75 million to take part in "I'm famous get me out of here!" and wolf down a pizza of sheep udders and cow nipples after sticking his head in the closest thing to a viper's nest. "I've had to deal with quite a few snakes in the European Parliament, so I'm going to be able to handle this," the former Farage MEP boasted at the outset during the introductions. "The best way to resolve a conflict is to stand up to it. I'm known in politics for Brexit..... I am a hero to some and a villain to millions. In the jungle they're going to know who I really am." What Farage didn't count on was the animosity of all his competitors, starting with TV presenter Josie Gibson: "Whatever we do, we're not going to do any worse than we did with the Brexit. French chef Fred Sirieix also blasted the Ukip founder for the controversial "breaking point" poster on refugees during the EU referendum: "You have demonized immigrants." Although the most combative of the contestants (which also includes Britney Spears' sister Jamie Lynn) was undoubtedly youtuber Nella Rose, born in Belgium 26 years ago and based in the British Isles since the age of seven, who got into a heated exchange with him on camera.... - Apparently, you're anti-immigrant. - Who said that? - I've seen it on the internet. - I'm not anti-immigrant, but we can't keep up with the numbers of people coming into the UK. - I am one of those "numbers"..... - The numbers are affecting the waiting list in public healthcare. - Am I preventing you from getting a doctor's appointment? What is preventing it is the lack of public funding.... You want us all to leave. Black people don't like you. - You'd be surprised to know that they do... Few had dared to challenge Mr. Brexit to such a direct debate, and it had to be in the jungle. At 59, a survivor of a freak plane crash and countless political battles, Farage was prepared to crawl through the mud but not to become cannon fodder at the drop of a hat. "Why is Nigel Farage the only person in the UK we can quietly insult?" wondered Jan Moir in The Daily Mail. Marina Hyde meanwhile questioned whether his appearance on the quiz show, apart from the million-dollar sum, is part of a campaign to "normalize" the character, although it seems clear that many people think Farage is "a normal person." The eternal outsider of British politics (who failed in all his attempts to become an MP in Westminster) has in fact been flirting for several months with his return to high politics, especially after having said that "Brexit is not working" and blaming the Conservative Party for having betrayed the British people. The hard wing of the Tories has even speculated about his return to the party he left three decades ago. Others fear that he will contest the election with the umpteenth reincarnation of Ukip, Reform UK, which tops 10% in the latest polls. Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has warned just in case that any vote not for the Conservatives will be a vote for Labour. Farage's extraordinary visibility these days (he has been seen up to his arse while showering in the jungle) contrasts however with the disdain of Sunak, who says he has no time to watch "I'm famous..." and with the apathy of the British people, who are boycotting the ITVreality show in their own way . Last season's nine million viewers are down to seven. Load-Date: November 28, 2023  End of Document
