   Nigel Farage, Mr. Brexit, plans to return to politics with Reform UK CE Noticias Financieras English December 17, 2023 Sunday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 808 words Body   Having survived the perils of the Australian jungle (he came third in 'I'm famous, get me out of here!'), Nigel Farage is planning a return to the mire of British politics. The former Ukip leader, rebranded by his friend Donald Trump as Mr. Brexit, aims to campaign with Reform UK and turn the 2024 election into a referendum on mass immigration. Farage himself, who pocketed (EURO)1.2 million for his TV venture, has sparked speculation by openly proclaiming "Never say never" in an interview on ITV in which he also presaged the "total defeat" of the Conservative Party. Reform UK chairman Richard Tice, who relieved his old friend in 2021 at the head of the party, has given even more arguments: "The more help Nigel can give us, the better for us". Tice acknowledged that it will be very difficult for Farage to "resist the temptation" to return to the forefront of politics, especially in light of the fiasco of Rishi Sunak's immigration policy and the record 745,000 net migrants in 2022. According to sources close to the former Ukip leader, quoted by The Observer, Farage would not directly contest a Westminster seat in 2024, given his long list of seven attempts and seven failures. Rather, his involvement would be more as a national-level campaign cheerleader for the party he helped found, on the embers of the Brexit Party, and which in some polls is as high as 9%. 37% of Conservative Party voters admit that they would have a "more favorable" view of Reform UK with Farage on board, and that is something that particularly worries Premier Rishi Sunak, who has prematurely picked up the mantle with a turn to the hard right, duetting with Georgia Meloni and warning from Rome that mass immigration "will overwhelm our countries and destroy our democracies." Farage's aim will be precisely to bring immigration back to the forefront, as he did during the Brexit referendum with his controversial "breaking point" poster, in the midst of a surge of refugees from the Syrian war. "Whether the big parties like it or not, we are going to make this election about immigration, in the same way that the 2019 election was about Brexit," the same sources revealed to The Observer. "We are going to call into question not only illegal immigration, but also 'legal' immigration. Who voted for this mass immigration?". Farage will foreseeably jump on the electoral bandwagon in January, in an event with which Reform UK aims to mark the pulse of the general election, initially scheduled for the autumn of 2024, although it could be brought forward to May. Immigration is currently the third priority of the British (behind public health and the cost of living), but 63% think that the numbers are "too high". Sunak, reinforced As if consciously preparing for the competition lurking on his right flank, Rishi Sunak has made mass immigration (and not just the boats crossing the English Channel) his workhorse for the election campaign. The prime minister has apparently emerged stronger from his arm wrestling with the Tories ' hardliners  over the Rwanda Act to deport immigrants pending asylum. According to the latest Opinium poll for The Observer, Sunak has managed to cut to 13 points (27% to 40%) the gap between the Conservative Party and Keir Starmer's Labour Party, which has seen its comfortable 20-point lead held for much of the year deflated. Other polls, such as YouGov (22% vs. 44%) or Ipsos (24% to 41%) still give a wide lead to the Labour Party, but the tendency is to narrow. Sunak has been visibly strengthened by his reaction to the conflict between Israel and Hamas, while Starmer has been questioned by a majority of his militants for not daring to call for a "cease-fire", something that David Cameron himself is now calling for as Foreign Secretary. In a personal head-to-head, Starmer has a six-point lead over Sunak on the inevitable question of who would make the better prime minister. The Labour leader plans to make defense of the National Health Service (NHS) his banner in the face of the decade-long austerity that has caused public services to decline and the economy to stagnate in the midst of a cost-of-living crisis. Starmer has anticipated the cancellation of the 'Rwanda plan' if he becomes prime minister, considering it "impracticable", and is in favor in exchange of reaching agreements with the EU for the return of immigrants pending asylum who reach British shores. Although he has promised to be "twice as tough on criminal gangs to secure our borders," his challenge will be to measure up in campaigning to the populist rhetoric that Sunak has already begun to use at the hard-right conclave in Rome. "Our enemies will see that we are incapable of dealing with this problem and will use the increasing use of immigration as a weapon: deliberately sending people to our shores to try to destabilize our societies." Load-Date: December 18, 2023  End of Document
