   Nissan's U-turn over Brexit as bosses admit they were too gloomy Mail on Sunday (London) November 27, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 28 Length: 311 words Byline: Emily Hawkins Body   THEY have been among the most vocal critics of Brexit - but now bosses at Japanese carmaker Nissan have talked down its impact. There was a 'negligible' effect from leaving the European Union, the firm said, while chief executive Makoto Uchida insisted Britain will remain its European base for 'the foreseeable future'. Nissan, which had warned about the effect of Brexit on its investment, now says it would not be making a fresh £2billion investment into its Sunderland factory if the UK was not still worthy. Mr Uchida added: 'I am quite surprised that people here in the UK are asking, "Why UK?" We have great people and great talent here.' Instead, he said, Britons should back the nation's business credentials more. After the Brexit referendum, there had been fears over the future of Nissan's Sunderland hub, which employs 6,000 people and supports 70,000 supply chain jobs. The company's chiefs warned UK operations would not be 'sustainable' without a trade deal with the EU. But last week Nissan announced a multi-billion-pound plan for the North East, including funding for a third major battery plant. It also confirmed it will make its latest electric Qashqai and Juke models at the factory, alongside the next generation of the electric Leaf. Mr Uchida told The Sunday Times the investment puts 'our Sunderland plant at the heart of our future vision'. Alan Johnson, Nissan's senior vice-president of manufacturing, said the firm had 'quickly adapted' to a 'more bureaucratic' post-Brexit and it would not have a major impact on its prices. 'It's negligible,' he said. Meanwhile, the Government yesterday pledged £50million of newly allocated funding to boost the UK's battery supply chain on the world stage by 2030. Ministers said the battery sector alone could create 100,000 highly paid and skilled jobs in the UK. Comment - Page 16 'At the heart of our vision' Load-Date: November 27, 2023  End of Document
