   OBR forecasts of post-Brexit trade slump 'just not true' The Daily Telegraph (London) November 6, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 451 words Byline: Gareth Corfield Body   FORECASTS by the Government's financial watchdog that Brexit would cause significant damage to UK-EU trade have failed to materialise and created "a false narrative" in the minds of the public, a think tank has said. Predictions made by the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) before Britain's exit from the bloc suggested that the UK economy would shrink by 4 per cent in the long run as a result of Brexit. But the Institute for Economic Affairs (IEA) said the UK's trade patterns with the EU failed to show any impact from Brexit, either since the referendum or the end of the transition www.period.UK exports to EU countries climbed by 13.5 per cent between 2019 and 2022, before and after Brexit, with exports to non-EU countries growing by 14.3 per cent, the IEA said. Meanwhile, UK services exports rose by 14.8 per cent to EU nations and 22.1 per cent to non-EU countries over the same period. Speaking at the Government's International Trade Week today, Kemi Badenoch, the Business Secretary, is expected to say of the report: "This is why I don't agree with the narrative that Brexit 'severely damaged' our economy. "Every major country, especially in Europe, has faced significant economic challenges over the last few years. "We should stop taking ourselves down, and instead talk ourselves up. "Contrary to some media reports and many pre-Brexit establishment voices, the data says Brexit has not had a major impact on UK-EU trade. "This is also why, when talking about commerce and industry, we have to deploy critical thinking and apply first principles of free and open trade." Catherine McBride, an economist at the IEA, said that while the pandemic, rising energy prices and so-called rules of origin tariffs had influenced trading patterns, there was no evidence of overall negative effects attributable to Brexit. She added: "A false narrative that Brexit has harmed UK trade is now firmly entrenched in the British public psyche, but this just isn't true. The vast majority of UK and EU trade is conducted by multinational companies who sell goods all over the world without baulking at the paperwork". The OBR has come under scrutiny after admitting that its economic forecasts contained "genuine errors" as it underestimated the inflation shock from Covid and the war in Ukraine. The financial watchdog said last month that its forecasts in March 2021 and March 2022 missed a large part of the spike in prices and the subsequent state support schemes, which led to ramifications for its predictions of tax revenues, spending and interest rates. David Miles, one of the OBR's executive team, told The Telegraph in March that forecasts it published at the time were "almost guaranteed to be wrong". Load-Date: November 6, 2023  End of Document
