   Plan aims to affirm N Ireland's place in the union by easing trade barriers; Political leaders hope proposals will end two years of Brexit deadlock and return to power sharing Financial Times (London, England) February 1, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 930 words Byline: PETER FOSTER;JUDE WEBBER Body   The government yesterday published the plan to convince Northern Ireland's biggest unionist party to return to the Stormont power-sharing executive, ending a bitter two-year stand-off over the trade border in the Irish Sea created by Brexit. The package will be enacted via legislation at Westminster today. It is designed to build on the Windsor framework agreed by the UK and EU last year. This eased many post-Brexit problems but unionists demanded further changes, arguing that it treated Northern Ireland differently to the rest of the UK by leaving trade barriers between the region and Great Britain. Nearly 12 months later, Democratic Unionist party leader Sir Jeffrey Donaldson has said his party will return to the executive having secured supplementary assurances set out in yesterday's command paper entitled Safeguarding the Union. N Ireland's place in the union Brexit created a trade border in the Irish Sea to avoid the return of a north-south border on the island of Ireland, which would have destabilised the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, the peace deal that ended three decades of conflict in Northern Ireland. As a result, Northern Ireland remains part of the UK internal market but must also follow EU rules for goods trade when any article is at risk of going over the border to Ireland and into the EU single market. The DUP argued that this hybrid arrangement diminished Northern Ireland's place in the UK by creating red tape for companies in Great Britain that send goods to Northern Ireland, deterring them from trading with the region. The new proposals, which include reducing checks on the Irish Sea border, new laws and new bodies to boost ties between the region and the rest of the UK, would collectively "affirm Northern Ireland's place in the union". The command paper also promised laws to prohibit future UK governments from signing international treaties that exclude Northern Ireland, as well as legislative commitments that would "copper-fasten" the region's place in the UK. Reaction to the proposals was mixed. One senior former UK official said the measures amounted to a "rhetorical repetition" of assurances already in place in the Windsor framework. But Lisa Claire Whitten, a research fellow at Queen's University in Belfast, described the proposals as "quite a significant reframing" of the post-Brexit constitutional arrangement for Northern Ireland. Reducing friction in the Irish Sea Under the Windsor framework the paperwork required to send goods to Northern Ireland from Great Britain was simplified, with companies that joined a UK trusted trader scheme able to use a "green lane" that required minimal paperwork. Goods destined for Ireland and the EU were required to use a "red lane" that required full EU customs paperwork and other regulatory documents. Under the new proposals, the UK will replace the narrow "green lane" with a broader internal market system that the government says will mean 80 per cent of goods travelling from Great Britain to Northern Ireland will require minimal paperwork. This means that companies wanting to send goods to Belfast will still need more paperwork than when sending them to, say, Birmingham because they will still be required to join the UK trusted trade scheme. But UK officials say that since some 7,000 companies have signed up to the scheme, the border will, in practice, be negligible. "It's true it's not exactly the same as sending goods inside Britain but the reality is the work has already been done," an official added. The command paper is also explicit that since the UK is now phasing in full border checks on imports from the EU, Irish businesses will face the full panoply of checks and paperwork when sending goods to the UK. By contrast, Northern Ireland's businesses will face no such checks and continue to have "unfettered access" to the rest of the UK, as set out in the original Windsor framework. Equality in the internal market The document contains a number of measures that are designed to cement Northern Ireland's place in the UK internal market. These include insisting that UK food producers label all products that are not destined for the EU single market as "Not for EU" - even if they are being sold in Great Britain. The food industry has lobbied hard against this measure, warning that the costs could run into "hundreds of millions of pounds". But the government says it is necessary to ensure that "no incentive arises" for British businesses to stop trading with Northern Ireland. Other proposals include the establishment of a body to boost trade, transport, education and cultural links between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK, and a second agency to focus on trade. The government will also require any public body introducing regulations in the UK to assess whether they will have any negative impact on Northern Ireland's place in the UK internal market. Unfinished business The Command Paper sets out measures that build on the foundations laid in the Windsor framework in order to cement Northern Ireland's place in the UK, both economically and politically. However, officials said the deal did not completely resolve the challenges created by Northern Ireland existing in a dual regulatory environment. Future potential bones of contention include resolving a disagreement over whether veterinary medicines used in Northern Ireland must be tested in the EU, and whether the EU's new carbon border taxes will apply to the region. Outlook page 20 'It's not exactly the same as sending goods inside Britain but the reality is the work has already been done' Graphic    Deal: DUP leader Jeffery Donaldson, left, and Northern Ireland secretary Chris Heaton-Harris address a news conference at Hillsborough Castle yesterday Niall Carson/PA Wire Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
