   Planes can be flown with ‘just one pilot’, says Airbus chief thetimes.co.uk February 17, 2024 Saturday 6:00 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 1037 words Byline: Oliver Gill Highlight: Christian Scherer says pilotless flights are technologically feasible Body   Airbus’s Christian Scherer has trailblazing in his blood. The man in charge of the world’s biggest aircraft maker was just ten when he watched his father take off on Airbus’s first aircraft on its maiden test flight above Toulouse on October 28, 1972.  So it is perhaps unsurprising that the 61-year-old German believes commercial flights can operate with a single pilot as the industry looks to cut costs and increase safety through greater automation. “Technologically, it is feasible,” he said. “And bear in mind if you go to a one-man cockpit, you might as well go to a zero-man cockpit. Because it all needs to cater for the eventuality that this one guy just ate a bad oyster and is incapacitated and the aeroplane has to take over. So one pilot or zero pilot is effectively the same thing.” Scherer’s backing for reducing the number of pilots in the cockpit may surprise many, given the well-publicised safety problems encountered by Boeing, Airbus’s American rival.  An Alaska Airlines  Boeing 737 Max 9 had to make an emergency landing last month after part of the fuselage blew out mid-flight. While all 177 passengers and crew landed safely back in Portland, Oregon, the blowout followed two crashes of Boeing’s 737 Max jets within six months of one another about five years ago that killed nearly 350 people. Philip Buller, an analyst at Berenberg, said: “Public perception is at a particularly low ebb when it comes to  aviation safety .” Scherer took over as chief executive of commercial aircraft at  Airbus last month and remains No 2 to the wider group boss Guillaume Faury. “Any progress that you introduce in this field has to first and foremost introduce the demonstration of greater reliability and safety,” Scherer said. “If we can demonstrate it’s going in the right direction, in terms of safety [and] reliability. And actually potentially even an enriching role of the pilot, who could become more of a mission manager as opposed to a driver, those kinds of things, they all converge.”  While it may surprise, and even alarm, the wider public, many within Airbus view one-pilot operation as simply the next step after pioneering technologies that the flying public nowadays takes for granted.  Airbus’s first aircraft, the A300, had just two engines in the 1970s, an era when three- or four-engine aircraft were the norm. In the early 1980s, Airbus was one of the first aircraft makers to dispense with on-board engineers, taking the number of people in the cockpit down from three to two. And “fly by wire” technology, whereby manual aircraft controls were replaced with electronic signals, was treated with suspicion when first introduced more than half a century ago.  It is now three and a half years since Airbus completed a “pilotless” test flight of its A350-1000 XWB jet, which can carry up to 410 passengers. Pilots were in the cockpit as a back-up, but were just passengers as the aircraft taxied, took off and landed at an airport in Toulouse.  In January last year, Airbus began testing its “DragonFly” technology, which kicks in if a pilot becomes incapacitated mid-flight. The software identifies the best airport to perform an emergency landing and bring the flight down safely. It operates in conjunction with air traffic controllers and other staff on the ground. The technology is seen as an important failsafe under single-pilot operation.  Honeywell, the American technology conglomerate, launched a project in November called “Darwin” to explore using artificial intelligence to overcome challenges to commercial flights being manned by a single pilot.  “There’s been a push for this for a while,” said Buller, the Berenberg analyst. “We used to have three, four engines on a plane; now we have two. There used to be the need for more engines on a plane for safety reasons if you are flying across the Atlantic. And now you have planes flying from London to Sydney with two engines. It feels like we are moving in the direction of single-pilot operation. It’s a matter of when, not if.” Pilots’ unions are among the staunchest opponents to single-pilot operations. A coalition of unions from both sides of the Atlantic said single-pilot flights amounted to “a profit-driven scheme that poses a significant safety risk”. Scherer is more concerned with the perception of passengers. “Whether it’s socially feasible is another question. How will the travelling public feel about going into a one-pilot aeroplane? Is that something that the population would accept?” he said.  Whether it is one pilot or zero pilots, the technology has “kind of proven its case”, he added. “It’s a big onion to be peeled.” Brexit less disruptive than feared Christian Scherer, chief executive of commercial aircraft at the Franco-German company, said that Brexit had made operating in the UK “a little bit more complicated” because of additional customs checks and immigration curbs, “but we’ve adapted and it works,” he said.  Brexit has been significantly less disruptive for Airbus’s business than the aircraft maker had feared, its second-in-command has admitted. Tom Enders, the former Airbus chief executive, had warned that a no-deal Brexit would affect tens of thousands of jobs and cost the British economy billions. In 2019, in a threat to pull out of the UK, Enders said: “If there is a no-deal Brexit, we at Airbus will have to make potentially very harmful decisions for the UK.” Last November, fellow Brexit critic  Nissan, the Japanese car giant, also shrugged off Britain’s exit  from the EU. Airbus, which employs about 12,000 people in the UK, can trace its British operations back to Hawker Siddeley, the company behind the Second World War Hurricane fighter. Scherer said the UK remained “our centre of competence for wings. And by virtue of our success, the footprint grows in the UK,” he said. “We like the productivity that we see here. And we like the quality that we’re seeing … so there’s no reason to change, despite the adaptation that we’ve had to go through for Brexit.” Airbus announced last week that it would pay a special dividend to shareholders after generating net cash of more than €10 billion. The aerospace giant also said that it would deliver 800 commercial aircraft to customers this year. Load-Date: February 17, 2024  End of Document
