   Pro-European Britons continue to speak out on the fourth anniversary of Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English January 31, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 631 words Body   Judith Mora London, Jan 31 (EFE) - On the fourth anniversary of Brexit an unyielding group of Britons who dream of returning to the European Union, some arriving from Spain, demonstrated Wednesday in front of the Parliament in London with a promise: "We will not surrender". Flying EU and British flags, with banners against the Conservative Party - which in 2016 called the referendum that led to the exit - and megaphones, the activists cried out once again that, although the political class tries to turn the page, they do not forget. Their protest in front of the bell tower of Big Ben coincided with the entry into force today, after several postponements, of the border controls that the UK will now apply to imports from the EU. According to protesters, another reminder of the economic disaster that was the divorce from Brussels. Helen Johnston, treasurer of the Bremain in Spain group, explained to EFE that, despite the apparent apathy of MPs in the (lower) House of Commons, they do not intend to throw in the towel. "Forty years ago, the (politicians) who were against the EU started their campaigns and it took them 40 years to achieve their goals. If we say: 'I give up, I can't go on fighting,' who will continue fighting?" this Englishwoman from Leicester, who now lives in Benicarló, told EFE in Spanish. With a view to this year's general elections in the United Kingdom, none of the major national parties - Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat - is proposing a return to the EU bloc and they are trying hard to avoid a debate that they fear will take votes away from them. "In this election year, they can't say out loud that they are in favor of returning to the EU. But they are not stupid, they know we are better off in Europe, for the economy, for security, for the environment, for all the opportunities for freedom of movement," said the also secretary of Grassroots for Europe. "People are aware of all this, but they are not ready to take the next step. We here, with our flags and protests, are the voice that constantly says: 'There are British people who do want to come back, we are here, we are not going to disappear," she stated. Like her, well-known activist Steve Bray, who is seen almost daily, since 2017, in front of London's Parliament protesting against Brexit with a top hat and a loudspeaker, dismisses that the way forward is a new referendum. "What I want is for the government to take the bull by the horns and make the decision to do what's best for the UK and for Europe. And that means us being in the single market, in the customs union and with freedom of movement," he told EFE. Bray, who finances his travels from Wales with funds raised online, finds it "disgusting" that politicians, including previously pro-European Labour and Liberal Democrats, are avoiding tackling Brexit at all costs. Despite this, she hopes to be able to stop demonstrating if Keir Starmer's Labour - a former supporter of a second plebiscite - wins the election scheduled for after the summer and advocates a rapprochement with the EU bloc. While 'the resistance' was making noise in the street, on social network X former British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who in 2019 negotiated the EU exit deal, defended his legacy. "Four years after Brexit, we celebrate the restoration of this country's democratic power to make its own laws and rules," he wrote. "We must retain the appetite and courage to move away from the European model of low growth and high regulation," he added. Johnson called for avoiding a return to formulas for managing trade relations that use "artificial concerns about the border between Northern Ireland and Ireland" (which must be invisible to preserve the 1998 Peace Agreement) as a pretext for keeping the U.K. aligned with EU rules.  Load-Date: February 1, 2024  End of Document
