   Reform UK surge to their best ever by-election result - but how much of a threat do they pose at the general election? Will Nigel Farage return as leader? And what are their tax-cutting and 'net zero' immigration plans? MailOnline February 16, 2024 Friday 9:38 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 1412 words Byline: Greg Heffer, Political Correspondent For Mailonline Body   Reform UK enjoyed their best ever performance at a by-election last night as they scooped 13 per cent of the vote in a third-placed finish in Wellingborough. The party founded by ex-UKIP leader Nigel Farage hailed a 'remarkable' result and said it showed how Britons are 'absolutely fed up' with how the country is being run. Their strong showing in Wellingborough was coupled with another third place in last night's other by-election in Kingswood, where they got 10 per cent of the vote. Election experts said the by-election results 'backed up' Reform's national opinion polling, which has seen the party hover around 10 per cent for a number of weeks. They also predicted Reform - formerly known as the Brexit Party - would be a 'significant player' at the general election as Tory worries of a significant split on the right of British politics continue to grow.  Those Conservative fears would deepen significantly if Mr Farage were to return as Reform leader to tubocharge the party's tax-cutting and 'net zero' immigration appeal to voters. He said last night he would 'probably' return if the general election presented an 'historic opportunity' to replace the Tories. How well did Reform UK do in Wellingborough and Kingswood? In Wellingborough, the Northamptonshire seat held by the Tories since 2005 but which switched to Labour last night, Reform won 3,919 votes. Their 13 per cent vote share, in a third-placed finish behind Labour and the Conservatives, was the party's best performance at a by-election. Reform candidate Ben Habib, a former Brexit Party MEP, hailed it as 'remarkable' result. Asked why people voted for him, he said: 'People are absolutely fed up with the manner in which this country is being governed.' Quizzed about Tory warnings that support for Reform would let Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer into Downing Street, Mr Habib replied: 'The only reason Labour win, if Labour win, is because the Tory party is utterly useless. 'The Conservative Party is the problem and they need to go.' In Kingswood, in South Gloucestershire, Reform also finished third in a contest won by Labour as Sir Keir's party took the seat off the Tories. Reform candidate Rupert Lowe, another former Brexit Party MEP and the ex-chairman of Southampton Football Club, won 2,578 votes. His 10 per cent of the vote was Reform's second-best performance in a by-election in this parliament - behind the 13 per cent it managed in Wellingborough. What threat do Reform pose at the general election? Analysis of last night's by-election results in Wellingborough and Kingswood will deepen Tory fears about the impact of a strong Reform showing at the general election. Many Conservative MPs are worried that Reform will split the vote on the right of British politics at the general election and hand Labour a huge number of seats.  If all the Reform voters had backed the Tories in Kingswood, the Conservatives would have held onto the seat. This repeated a situation seen in the by-elections last year in Tamworth and Mid Bedfordshire. And, in Wellingborough, Reform's total was more than 50 per cent of the Tory vote - although adding on Reform votes not have been enough for the Conservatives to hang onto the seat. The Tory vote share in the seat collapsed from 62.2 per cent in 2019 to just 24.6 per cent last night.  Elections expert Professor Michael Thrasher said it was impossible to say how many Tories had switched directly to Labour last night because the presence of Reform 'muddies the water'. He predicted the party, founded by Mr Farage and headed by Richard Tice, would be a 'significant player' at the general election. 'Any support that Reform gets is bound to hurt Conservatives and will be the difference between some Conservatives holding on to their seats or losing them,' he told Sky News. 'They are a critical player at the next election.' Prof Thrasher highlighted how in Kingswood the Reform vote was slightly larger than the majority Labour secured. He said: 'You can be certain that sitting Conservative MPs are doing precisely those kind of numbers to see how much damage they can do... it's not quite as successful as UKIP was in 2015, but they are going to be significant players. 'Whether and how the Conservative party as a whole begins to have a conversation with Reform... I will be interested to see that.' Chris Hopkins, political research director at pollster Savanta, said: 'There has been a suspicion in the polling industry for quite some time that we're overstating support for Reform UK. 'Savanta's figures have had them at 9 per cent nationally, while others have had them even higher, but this has never been backed up at actual elections, until now.  'Designs on a second-place finish in Wellingborough fell someway short, but 10 per cent as a baseline in Kingswood is impressive, and possibly points to their appeal not necessarily being highly concentrated in a handful of seats.' Tory former Cabinet minister Sir Jacob Rees-Mogg urged his party to learn from the Kingswood by-election result - although he played down its significance ahead of the general election. 'I think we should learn from this result and look at what happened with the Reform Party vote,' he said. 'Conservative Party votes are most likely to come from people who stay at home or who voted Reform. 'How do we win them back to the Tory family? People who share many views and values with us. 'By delivering things they believe in and that means lower taxation, taking more of the advantages of Brexit, with more of the removal of EU retained law, it means doing less on the green issue that is making people cold and poor, and helping revitalise our economy.' Will Nigel Farage return as Reform leader? Mr Farage, who led UKIP for many years, founded the Brexit Party in late 2018 and oversaw its rebrand to Reform UK in 2020. He stepped down as Reform leader a year later, to be replaced by Mr Tice, and moved to become the party's honorary president. But Mr Farage has repeatedly refused to rule out a return as Reform leader ahead of the general election and remained coy on his intentions last night. 'Everyone speculates will I come back as leader? I might do, I might not - I don't know, he told GB News. 'My big fear would be to come back and get five million votes and three seats. 'If I see a really historic opportunity to go in and to win a large number of seats and to replace the Conservative Party, well I'd probably do it. But I'm not sure yet.' Many Tories fear that Reform could double their poll rating and pose an possible existential threat to the Conservatives if Mr Farage returned as party leader. At the 2015 general election, Mr Farage led UKIP to almost four million votes - although they picked up only one seat in the House of Commons. The Brexit Party, under Mr Farage's leadership, won the European Parliament elections in 2019 as ex-PM Theresa May struggled to get Britain out the EU. Mr Farage recently enjoyed a successful stint on TV's I'm A Celebrity, which boosted his recognition among Britons, while he also has a regular GB News show. What are Reform UK's main policies? Refom vow to 'make Britain great again' and describe how there is an 'essential need' to overhaul 'the way our country is run and managed, so it works properly for the people'. A list of policies on the party's website includes lifting the threshold for paying income tax to £20,000 from £12,570, removing VAT on energy bills, lowering fuel duty by 20p per litre, and lowering VAT from 20 per cent to 18 per cent. They also want to reduce Corporation Tax from 25 per cent to 20 per cent, lift the 40p income tax rate threshold to £70,000, reduce Stamp Duty, abolish business rates for small and medium firms, and abolish Inheritance Tax for all estates under £2million. Reform want to see zero NHS waiting lists and suggest offering patients vouchers to use private doctors if they have to wait too long. They are also promising to increase the number of police officers in the community, reform the BBC by abolishing the licence fee, reform the unelected House of Lords, and make the voting system for Westminster elections 'more representative' by introducing proportional representation. Reform want to see 'net zero' immigration, which means that the number of people legally allowed to live and work in the UK each yer equals the number emigrating, so the overall population remains approximately the same. The party are also extremely critical of the Government's climate change policies. Load-Date: February 16, 2024  End of Document
