   Rise of support for Reform UK highlights threat to PM's right; Populist party Financial Times (London, England) February 17, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 689 words Byline: RAFE UDDIN ; JONATHAN VINCENT Body   Reform UK has underperformed when put to the test in by-elections since its relaunch in 2020. But this week, the populist party's threat on Rishi Sunak's right flank showed it could meaningfully chip away Conservative votes. Reform secured 13 per cent of the vote in the Northamptonshire seat of Wellingborough and 10 per cent in Kingswood near Bristol yesterday. It was the first time the party's vote share had entered double digits in by-elections. Both former Tory-held seats were won by Labour after big swings away from the governing party, but Reform's showing previewed how Sunak would be squeezed at a general election expected this year, particularly in areas where a majority voted for Brexit in 2016. Reform leader Richard Tice said he was "delighted" by the performance. He said it showed that Reform's opinion polling was translating into actual votes. National polls have shown a sustained increase in support for Reform from 3 per cent in October last year to 10 per cent in the lead-up to the by-elections. Philip Cowley, politics professor at Queen Mary University of London, said the results were the "first sign in the wild" that Reform was a genuine danger to the Conservatives, adding: "They now face Labour polling well and Reform taking votes from the right." He said the threat of the Liberal Democrats in some southern seats meant Sunak would be "fighting on three flanks in England and Wales". Helen Harrison, the defeated Tory candidate in Wellingborough, said yesterday that Reform was a "bit of a threat to us Conservatives", while Sunak warned that a "vote for anyone who isn't the Conservative candidate ... is just a vote to put Keir Starmer in power". But even if every voter for Reform in Wellingborough had backed the Tories, they still would have lost to Labour. Before Thursday, Reform had done worse than its polling average in most by-elections it has contested since the Brexit party was rebadged Reform UK in November 2020. Reform previously outperformed its polling averages in only two seats, Old Bexley and Sidcup, a suburb in London, and North Shropshire, a Tory safe seat that flipped to the Liberal Democrats in 2021. In the other 14 by-elections since November 2020, Reform underperformed. By contrast, the party's spiritual predecessor Ukip generally outperformed its polling in the years leading up to the Brexit vote. Keiran Pedley of Ipsos Mori said Reform had put up high-profile candidates in Wellingborough and Kingswood - including its deputy leader - to deliver a "solid double digit vote share" and apply pressure to the Tories. "These two seats were big tests for Reform," he said. "There's a common thread from Ukip to the Brexit party to Reform of the party shaping the policies of the Conservatives and there's a wing of voters on the right who will lend their vote [for this purpose]." Both constituencies were Brexit-supporting areas in 2016 and Reform would be expected to do well in them. Wellingborough voted 63 per cent for Brexit and Kingswood 57 per cent. Ben Habib, Reform's deputy leader and candidate in Wellingborough, insisted ahead of the vote that the party was a genuine electoral contender, not a pressure group. "We are not here as a facilitator for handing the baton either to one party or the other," he said. As he went door to door, Habib told potential voters that Reform was there to sweep away a "corrupt political system". Reform will publish its manifesto, which it has branded a "contract with the people", later this month. It is expected to focus on immigration, axing net zero policies and cutting taxes. Ahead of the by-election in Wellingborough, local residents Phillis Sangster, 75, and her daughter Julia, 50, were split on whether to stick with the Tories. "We've discussed Reform, [but] I'm going to vote for the Conservatives. They've done quite a bit for us,'' said Phillis, pointing to the pension triple lock and immigration rhetoric. Julia was less convinced: "I think the Tories seem to be more talk than action. Reform seems to be more for this country." 'We are not here as a facilitator for handing the baton either to one party or the other' Load-Date: February 16, 2024  End of Document
