   Rwanda Bill must be strengthened or we will kill it o, Tory 'Spartans' warn Sunak; MPs compare Rwanda Bill to May's ill-fated Brexit deal The Sunday Telegraph (London) January 14, 2024 Edition 2, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,6 Length: 619 words Byline: Will Hazell Body   THE leaders of the three biggest groups on the Conservative Right have united to warn Rishi Sunak that they will vote against him on the Rwanda Bill this week unless he gives ground. Writing for The Sunday Telegraph, they compare themselves to the Tory "Spartans" who sank Theresa May's Brexit deal. Danny Kruger, Sir John Hayes and Mark Francois urge colleagues to join them in "standing rm" against Downing Street "pressure". On Tuesday, the Rwanda Bill will return to Parliament for line-by-line scrutiny in its committee stage on the oor ofthe Commons. Almost 60 rebels are backing amendments aiming to curb virtually all legal challenges by migrants against deportation to Rwanda and block attempts by Strasbourg judges to halt deportation ights. The fate of the Bill will rest in large part on the decisions made by MPs in three groups on the Right of the party - the European Research Group, chaired by Mr Francois, the Common Sense Group, chaired by Sir John, and the New Conservatives, co-chaired by Mr Kruger. The three backbenchers claim that, in its current form, the Bill does not a ord ministers the necessary powers to achieve Mr Sunak's pledge to "stop the boats". "As the leaders of the three largest groups of Conservative MPs on the conservative wing of the parliamentary party, we have united in recent weeks to express our fear that the Safety of Rwanda Bill fails to do that," they write. "We have two principal concerns. Firstly, the Bill as currently drafted does not give ministers the express authority to ignore - as a default - the anonymous 'pyjama injunctions' of the European Continued on Page 6 Reports: Pages 6-7 Editorial Comment: Page 19 Continued from Page 1 Court of Human Rights. Second, the continued right of migrants to delay their departure for many months, by making individual claims to UK courts by citing any number of personal circumstances, risks frustrating the entire purpose of the legislation." "  The intervention comes after therst migrant Channel crossing ofthe year was reported on Saturday, with around 50 people brought to shore in Dover, Kent. The leaders of the three groups predict that No 10 would lean on MPs to "withdraw their support" from amendments put forward by Sir Bill Cash, the veteran backbencher, and Robert Jenrick, the the former immigration minister, which aim to "close these loopholes". They say: "We urge our colleagues to stand firmly with and for the British people who, as polling shows, overwhelmingly support robust action to combat illegal migration." Firing a shot across Mr Sunak's bows, they compare the current Bill to Mrs May's ill-fated Brexit deal, thwarted by 28 rebel "Spartan" Tory MPs, who voted against it on three occasions. Mr Francois was one of the 28 MPs. "Many will recall the moment in 2019 when MPs were asked to swallow Mrs May's inadequate Brexit deal," the three write. "We were told then that a failure to accept it would see Brexit abandoned and our party out of power. "In fact, the Brexit 'Spartans' who held rm set o a chain of events that saw Brexit delivered and a historic Conservative election victory. "As in 2019, standing rm this week requires courage, for we will face criticism from colleagues that we are letting the perfect be the enemy ofthe good. "But the point is that the Bill is simply not good enough in its current form to deliver the outcome we all seek." "  A government spokesman said: "Under this new Bill, migrants will no longer be able to frustrate the decision to remove them to Rwanda by bringing systemic challenges in our courts, and this Bill also disapplies every single avenue used by individuals to block therst ight to Rwanda, including asylum, modern slavery and human rights claims." Load-Date: January 14, 2024  End of Document
