   SHE SAYS 'DATING TORY IS THE ONLY FORM OF TRICKLE-DOWN ECONOMICS THAT WORKS' HE SAYS 'OUR FIRST BIG ARGUMENT? WHEN I TOLD HER I REALLY LIKE PRITI PATEL' Sleeping with the enemy The Times (London) April 27, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: MAGAZINE;FEATURES; Pg. 18,19,20,21,23,25 Length: 3660 words Body   GRAINNE MAGUIRE, 43, comedian, and MEHUL SHAH, 44, hedge funder Grainne As a working-class Irish gal, I've always harboured a dark crush on uptight English Tory boys - I blame Jane Austen and Bridget Jones. There's something incredibly exotic about a repressed man of fortune who reads The Spectator and secretly yearns for a scrappy upstart who'll teach him to live in the moment and that all his political opinions are wrong, and yet still lets her live in his big house. And with the current state of most creative industries, if you are unlucky enough to be a left-wing, liberal heterosexual woman, the only way to survive is to get yourself a man with a mortgage who knows his way around a gilet. There are many upsides to being leftwing: you're always right about absolutely everything; impeccable taste in podcasts; and a job that at least sounds interesting. What do you not have? Money. What do conservative men have? Apart from bad taste in jeans and a job that exists somewhere on the spectrum between tedious and evil? Money. Dating Tory is the only form of trickle-down economics that actually works. On our first date he wore perfectly ironed chinos and talked about a fintech job that, to this day, gun to my head, I could not explain. He was funny and cute, but his sweetness came with an unexpected sea salt crunch of right-of-centre thinking in the caramel. And when I paid for our first round of drinks, he looked at me like I was Jane Fonda. The bar was low and I was ready to gambol over it. Left-wing men read the same articles as you, follow the same people on Twitter/X and usually work in the same industries. Worse, they don't like it when you explain things to them and it's much harder to feel like the best one in the relationship. What's the point? With a Conservative boy, you are a multicoloured unicorn. You are by default always the better one - more compassionate, cultured, clued in. You don't even have to do anything; you just have to feel bad about stuff and they look at you like you're Michelle Obama. We only really fought in the first year of dating. "What should I do, girls?" I'd sigh, revelling in my main character status. "Mehul is a raging Tory. Can it work?" It was a real-life Beauty and the Beast situation, if Belle occasionally retweeted Owen Jones and the Beast still believed in George Osborne's austerity programme. When he told me he voted for Brexit, I remember crying, but also really enjoying the exquisite torture of it all. "You do realise," I said, sobbing, half-imagining Julianne Moore playing me in what was sure to be an Oscar-winning role, "in voting for Brexit, you were voting against me!" I'd never felt so wronged and yet so in the right in my life - it was heaven. Mehul has an irritating way of winning arguments. Like using the fact his parents, both Tory voters, moved from Kenya to London in the Seventies, started their own business, raised two perfect children who studied practical subjects at top-level universities, now own property and have high-paying jobs. Which is obviously really annoying, if I'm honest. He rudely understands how interest rates work and has an ironclad pension and savings. My retirement plan is our relationship and the hope that by the time I'm old, society has collapsed and we all trade in fresh water. Mehul and I fill in each other's blind spots. I bring him to weird comedy nights, and he pays for them. I'll quietly throw out a Melanie Phillips book he bought during his "lost years" and he'll tease me about the 30-day Investigate Your White Privilege workbook I loudly bought and then gave up on after three days because I got too depressed. He gets to have his fancy showgirl wife; I get to live in central London. Now, when we go on holiday, the highlight of any trip is that moment where we go through airport customs and I, humming Ode to Joy, wave him goodbye and skip through the EU channel. Nothing sums up our different attitude to life better than the fact Mehul used his credit card to slowly accrue frequent flyer points, whereas I used mine to rack up debt paying to perform at the Edinburgh Festival. On our honeymoon, he cashed in the points he'd diligently and patiently saved over ten years to buy first-class flights for us both. He spent the flight blissed out watching The Lord of the Rings for the 50th time, while I watched a harrowing documentary about the opioid crisis in the US. Don't worry, for the rest of our holiday I made sure to tell him all about it. Mehul When I first met Grainne, I didn't quite realise how political she was. And I had never been particularly noisy about my own politics. But I felt like I was masquerading a little bit - that if Grainne and her friends knew who I really was, that maybe they wouldn't like me. So, on about our third date, I felt I had to say something. I told her I really like Priti Patel. That was our first big argument. We had lots of fights in the beginning, like the time when we went to play crazy golf with our friends and - we were both a bit drunk - she asked me if I'd join a trade union, then got upset when I said that I wouldn't. We played the entire round in silence, but for her tears. My parents were small-business owners, adored Margaret Thatcher, and though they were a bit put off by the Tory sleaze of the Nineties and toyed with the idea of voting for Tony Blair, in the end they couldn't - they are diehard Tories. My economics teacher at school also had a big influence on me in terms of free market capitalism. Then I went into tech finance, and even joined the Tory party in about 2005 - not that I did anything with my membership, but I really liked David Cameron and his friend, George. I voted for Brexit - and I still think that was the right thing to do and that it could have worked if it had been executed properly - but that's probably when my love affair with Cameron ended. Grainne and I no longer have many arguments. My views have definitely become more aligned with hers over time, and she likes to take credit for that - and she's probably right to a certain extent. But politics has changed too. You can't vote for these Conservatives in the next election; you'd have to be insane. As a rightwinger, you're always made to feel like you're the bad person, like you have no morals, while lefties like to think they have the monopoly on being good people. These days, I do get to feel a bit smug though. My job has taken off and I'm earning more money than I used to? and Grainne wants to live in a penthouse in Soho. And though she really hates the idea of private healthcare, she'd also like to be on my private healthcare plan. SUSANNAH JOWITT, 55, writer, and ANTHONY, 58, fund manager Susannah Most of us can identify a Sliding Doors moment in our lives when one word could have sent our life in a totally different direction. Mine was just over 25 years ago, when I shouted at Anthony, my fiancé at the time, "I can't marry someone who thinks like this - your politics make me sick!", and barrelled out of a room packed with friends and family. Two minutes later, I heard my fiancé's sister on the phone. "Mum, I think the wedding is off? Yes, screaming at each other? Over politics. Yes! The Good Friday agreement. I know! And neither of them even Irish." Reader, I married him. My husband, Anthony, is a lifelong Conservative. He stood as a Westminster councillor in the Nineties, before I met him, stood as the Tory candidate for Darlington in 2005 and went through several candidacy selections in 2008-2010. For 20 years he worked the grassroots on the streets of London, the dales of Yorkshire and the cobbles of the northeast, always loyal to Tory policies. By contrast, when we met in 1997, I was a card-carrying member of the Labour Party, a huge fan of the "third way" offered by New Labour and prone to humming The Red Flag as I brushed my teeth, because my dentist had told me it was the perfect teeth-cleaning verse length. I have never in my life voted Conservative, even when I became disillusioned with New Labour over the Iraq war, choosing instead to vote Green or for the Women's Equality Party. Anthony and I even split for Brexit, with me choosing to Remain, while he was in the Leave camp. As we walked together to the polling station on referendum day in 2016, I remember thinking how, yet again, we were cancelling out each other's vote. We are, then, irretrievably divided. We still have fabulously fiery political shouting matches. Now our children are grown-up, they join in with gusto too. My 22-yearold daughter voted Conservative in the last election but is often diametrically opposed to her Tory father on all "modern" issues. Our 20-year-old son hasn't previously been old enough to vote, so we are all canvassing him for this election, but he's a student reading international affairs so he could go rogue. Storming off is less common than it used to be when we were younger or when they were teenagers, but our supper table is still infamous for its shoutiness. There is one thing on which my husband and I are united: we both, crucially, have that political bug. My first job was working as a researcher for a Tory MP in the House of Commons, alongside my peers such as David Cameron, Rachel Whetstone and Ed Vaizey, and witnessing at first hand the ousting of Mrs Thatcher in 1990; then I was briefly a political lobbyist before throwing it all in to become a novelist. My second novel, In the Red, published in my late twenties, was set in the Westminster world of plotting and feuding, gossip and scandal, so for nearly a decade, that political hot air was my oxygen. Then I met my match in Anthony, a true political animal. He started a Scottish branch of Young Conservatives in Glasgow, was president of the Union and a devout Tory hack at Oxford, shared a staircase at Balliol College with Boris, is best friends with Michael Gove and, when he proposed in December 1997, warned me that his job working in the City was purely to finance a later career in politics: he wanted to become an MP himself. I only truly understood what I was up against in 2004, when we moved back from Hong Kong, where we had spent our first few married years, and I was unpacking boxes left over from his flat. I flipped open an old exercise book to see if I could throw it away and saw a diary entry from when he was 15, in 1981, at the Conservative spring conference in Scotland. It was a love letter to Margaret Thatcher: "Today our great leader took the rostrum?" it started, then finished, "Today has been the greatest day of my life. Long live Mrs Thatcher!" Oh crikey, I thought, politics isn't just a bug for Anthony; it's a raging epidemic. I'd better get serious. Which is why, for the next few years, a casual observer would have said I was the perfect Tory wife. I canvassed and leafleted the housing estates and cul-desacs of Darlington throughout his election campaign in 2005. I stood by my man through the bruising years of 2008-2010, when his face didn't fit the new "A list" criteria and Conservative Central Office betrayed his years of loyalty by supporting the likes of Matt Hancock, Shaun Bailey and Julian Smith over him as candidates - and I held him up through the shipwreck of all his dreams as he was denied a seat. I only drew the line at accompanying him when he went to Thatcher's funeral; I had a feeling that the mask would slip and I would get the inappropriate giggles. What holds us together across the political divide is our passion for things that matter. Apathy would be the death of us; the stimulus of debate is our narcotic. We agree on how to bring up our children, we agree on how we can do our bit to save the planet and we agree about what to watch on telly. The important things. CRAMPTON ROBERT Anthony When Susannah told me she was voting for the Green Party in the 2019 election, I despaired. It was the impracticality that really irked me. A vote for the Greens was just a wasted vote; to say nothing of them being further to the left of Labour on many basic policy areas. OF COURTESY I only realised recently that nearly all my votes of the past 25 years have been wasted. The first time Susannah and I voted together I knew that she would vote Labour, thereby cancelling out my own vote, but it was only a few months ago, during a particularly raucous argument, that it came out that she had never voted Conservative once in all our years together. Every time we've headed off to the polling station together, sometimes hand-in-hand, the exercise of my electoral franchise has simply been cancelled out. It turns out that I allowed myself to be hoodwinked from the start. Because Susannah had worked for a Conservative MP, I naturally assumed that she was a staunch Tory and that her proud announcement to me when we met that she was a "card-carrying" Labour member was more out of pique with what she called "callous" Thatcherism. In my efforts to get elected as an MP, the political divide between us seemed to disappear. She was so supportive during my political candidacy years that she convinced even me that she had come back into the Tory fold. It was only later that I realised just how grateful I should be, given that she had simply kept quiet for my sake. I realise now that all those years when she insisted on preserving the secrecy of the ballot box were as much about not letting on to me about her lasting left-wing leanings as about the principle. There was no such secrecy about the Brexit referendum. Susannah was open about her intentions. I'm actually grateful she and I agreed to disagree. Whenever I told Remainers that I voted Leave, they would look at me as if I'd stepped in something unspeakable. But when I added, "Oh, but my wife voted Remain, so we just cancelled each other out," they then looked relieved and as though I could be readmitted to the human race. The gloves only came off for us when I became disillusioned with politics and abandoned any political ambitions. Now we're happily back to going at it hammer and tongs on the issues we are divided on, with no thought of toeing a party line. I wouldn't miss our shouting matches, though I retain some optimism that one day we will totter down to the polling station and vote the same way, finally making my "X" count. ROBERT CRAMPTON, 59, journalist, and NICOLA ALMOND, 60, property analyst Robert I wouldn't want to overplay the political distance between my wife and I. We both started out as bolshie kids in the Seventies, and coming on 50 years later, we can both still get equally steamed up about the English class system, the honours list, the royal family, the House of Lords, water privatisation, snobbery, bigotry, deference, the established church and why anyone would want to join the Garrick Club. Our paths did diverge for a while, however, in the Eighties. During the miners' strike, which began 40 years ago last month, I spent a lot of time collecting donations for the strikers and visiting picket lines in West Yorkshire. Meanwhile, Nicola, my friend from school and future wife, was at Durham University, having a ball. If I was Boys from the Blackstuff, she was more Brideshead Revisited. Isaac Foot, Michael's dad, famously said, "I judge a man by one thing: which side would he have liked his ancestors to fight on at Marston Moor?" I rejected the hedonism of the Eighties; for a while, I suspect Nicola was a little seduced by the Cavaliers. We were both 20 years old. Five years later, in the summer of 1989, I went straight from a final exam in Oxford to a protest about the Tiananmen Square massacre. By then, Nicola was working as an equities analyst at a stockbroker in the City and driving a Peugeot 205 around London when not flying to Amsterdam or Zurich to grill some poor chief exec on his results. She got up at 6.30am and put on a business suit with shoulder pads. I got up when I felt like it and, whatever I slung on, it most certainly lacked internal structure. We talk about today's culture wars, yet the Eighties was also a horribly divisive, polarised era. Labels got stuck on you, nuance ignored, roles assigned. For many of my friends and pretty much all my family, the mere fact of Nicola working in finance meant she must be a diehard Tory, and must therefore hold a suite of unpleasant views about minorities, trade unions, poor people and foreigners. She didn't, yet that didn't matter. One stage on my own long journey away from the leftism of my youth was initiated by the nasty, inaccurate assumptions many comrades made about my wife's political and social views, simply because of what she did for a living. She wasn't a Tory, diehard or otherwise, then or now. Nicola knew state spending had to be paid for ultimately by profitable private enterprise, duties were as important as rights, people were motivated as often by self-interest as altruism. In short, she saw the world the way it is, while I was yet to accept those truths. In some circles, evidence-based reasoning and scepticism about human nature are enough to get you labelled right-wing. In the autumn of 1990, we bought a flat together. Well, Nicola bought it. I was yet to earn a significant income. Nicola left the City in 1996. It took me another 15 years before I earned what Nicola did when she quit. I think that fact alone - money - placed her further to the right than me at the time: she had more to lose from higher taxation; I didn't really have skin in the game. I should explain that I was left-wing as much by birth as by conviction. My mum's uncle was a founder member of the Communist Party of Great Britain in 1920. Her family, working-class Londoners, were active during the glory years of the Battle of Cable Street and the International Brigades. Later, another uncle was blacklisted for being a union activist. My mum and dad were Labour Party activists for as long as I can remember. He became an MEP, she was a councillor for many years. Anti-Apartheid, Rock against Racism, CND, Greenpeace, May Day marches, the Durham Miners' Gala - I was steeped in the protest movement. I didn't really need to do anything to prove my credentials as a man of the left; they were a given. Lucky old me, because by and large, leaving aside the Communism, which my mum and dad never entertained anyway, that inheritance has put me on the right side of history. So any split between Nicola and me wasn't so much ideological as tribal, just as it was between me and anybody else who didn't come from such a niche, intensely politicised background. I can't, after 33 years on The Times, in all conscience describe myself as anti-establishment any longer. I'm Clem Attlee and Tony Blair nowadays, not Tony Benn or, God forbid, Vladimir Lenin. Gradualist, social democratic reform, that's me. Scandinavia, basically. I reckon Nicola wouldn't have a problem with the UK being more TIMES THE LLOYD/ MATT like Scandinavia. And, indeed, the way our country is right now, who would? Nicola Back when I was at school with Robert our politics were pretty much aligned. We spent a lot of time talking politics, organising demos and marches. We were anti-apartheid, anti-racism, anti-nuclear and above all anti-Thatcher. It was the zeitgeist. I was also becoming an ardent feminist, although many were already claiming that battle was won. Being part of the protest movement felt important, and it certainly made life in the suburban north much more interesting. In this pre-internet and social media age, making placards and banners, going on coach trips and marching in the street shouting were all very exciting and a welcome antidote to the tedium of teenage life. It was a lot of fun. We took part in a nuclear disarmament march in Bradford. Arriving at the town hall chanting, "Maggie, Maggie, Maggie - Out! Out! Out!" we were welcomed into a huge buffet laid on by the council. They congratulated us for completing our 70-mile pilgrimage from Hull - we didn't have the heart to tell them we'd travelled there by coach and only joined the march near the end. The biggest (and last) protest I took part in was the CND march in London in the autumn of 1981. To celebrate the occasion Robert and I set up Wolfreton School CND (complete with a constitution and officers) and made a huge banner from a white sheet and black poster paint, captured in a photo in the Hull Daily Mail. When I went to university that October I began a slow drift away from the radical left. Robert meanwhile was still on-message, visiting Greenham to "Embrace the Base" and squatting for four days up a 150ft tower crane to halt construction of a new Nato HQ near High Wycombe. By 1990 we were reunited and living together in London. I had a high-earning City job and Robert was a trainee journalist at The New Statesman. To my City colleagues I was a "red" for not buying any privatisation shares in the great utilities sell-off, but to many of Robert's colleagues I was a pariah - they regularly turned their back on me at parties. By the time of the 1997 election I was happy to see the back of the Tories (again) but not in love with New Labour. This was the last time they had my vote. At home with a baby and toddler the personal became political. Economically I'd settled into social liberalism, voting Lib Dem, but like most people caring a lot more about injustice and inequality than economics. The only issue that (nearly) got me back on the streets was Brexit, which of course I voted against. More recently I discovered the Women's Equality Party, which I now vote for whenever they're on the ballot, which happily in Hackney is in most elections. I may even join. n SHE SAYS 'When he told me he voted for Brexit, I cried' HE SAYS 'She hates private healthcare. But would join mine' SHE SAYS 'At 15 he wrote a love letter to Margaret Thatcher' HE SAYS 'I assumed she was Tory but she hoodwinked me' HE SAYS 'I was Boys from the Blackstuff; she was more Brideshead Revisited' SHE SAYS 'To Robert's left-wing colleagues, my City job made me a pariah' Graphic    Grainne Maguire, 43, and Mehul Shah, 44, photographed by Katie WilsonAnthony and SusannahGrainne and MehulRobert Crampton and Nicola Almond's wedding, 1998Crampton and Almond Load-Date: April 27, 2024  End of Document
