   Something smells of stiff in England: the collapse of the alpha party of pensioners CE Noticias Financieras English December 5, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1950 words Body    You've seen enough movies about the decline of the Roman Empire and Elvis in Las Vegas to recognize an end of cycle: when Brexit figureheads end up on reality TV and Brexit defenestrated people return to government, you don't need to look at the (disastrous) polls to understand that the British Conservative bloc is in freefall.  At the end of 2019, Boris Johnson swept the general election. The British must believe that we are talking about another era, as they have seen three different Prime Ministers(Boris, Lizz Truss and Rishi Sunak) pass since then, but we are still in the same legislature. If an election were held tomorrow in the UK, the Tories would be on the verge of collapse, according to the polls, which give them a 20-point disadvantage against Labour on average, as well as overwhelming differences in seats: 503 for Labour/49 for the Conservatives (according to a recent Techne poll).  At what point did the alpha party of British politics, one of the most stable and rock-solid political institutions in the West, become the Atlético de Madrid when Jesús Gil was sacking six coaches a year  While Boris Johnson's agony was resounding, the great Tory fall in the polls (from which they have not yet recovered) came with his successor, Lizz Truss, who sank the economy with an ultra-liberal shock that nobody (not even her own) understood very well. Truss lasted 44 days in office.  Then came Rishi Sunak, now consumed by electoral doubts: although he could extend the legislature for another year, there are rumors of an early election, which gives an idea, given the polls, of the little conservative margin to reverse the situation: "Sunak's dilemma: when to call an election, which he will surely lose", headlined the New York Times a few days ago.  The recent appointment of David Cameron as Foreign Secretary exemplifies the Tory identity crisis: how is it possible that the former Prime Minister who launched a referendum to remain in the EU (and lost it) is now managing British foreign policy? What is seen as a decadent joke from outside the UK (and also partly from within), also has internal logics: the signing of Cameron would be an attempt by Sunak to revitalize his government from moderation (Cameron's arrival was accompanied by the replacement of Suella Braverman, the incendiary Home Secretary).  The changes in the government have been greeted with skepticism . "If the move smacks of a desperate move, that's because it is. It hasn't worked for Sunak to present himself as a competent technocrat cleaning house after the chaos of Johnson and Truss, nor as the anti-establishment rebel who was going to change the way things were done, nor as the man who would fix the economy, reduce immigration and public health waiting lists. So he has opted for relative moderation and withdrawn Brexit -until now, the first commandment of the Conservative Party- from his government program", according to La Vanguardia. The new government, has now put the turbo of the astrakhan...  First, he said that the Brexit had failed (or rather, the Tories who managed it): "What the Brexit has shown is that our politicians are as useless as those in Brussels... We have not benefited economically from the Brexit when we could have done so". Second, Farage has enlisted in the British version of Survivor, I'am a celebrity, get me out of here, where (so far) he has demonstrated at least two things: 1) that he is not doing as badly as the UK with the Brexit (he is said to have been paid £1.75 million for participating in the reality show and could use his new TV fame to get back into the political ring) and 2) that the Conservative bloc that pushed for the Brexit has exploded into increasingly absurd pieces.  The interview.  The question is whether we are living the last days of the oldest political party in the world (a title in dispute with the American Democrats, whose party was founded six years earlier, in 1828, although the British Conservatives were born inheriting the political space of The Tories, founded in the very remote 1678).  No one seems better placed to answer this question than Phil Burton-Cartledge, Professor of Sociology at the University of Derby and author of a recently updated book - The Party's Over: The Rise and Fall of the Conservatives from Thatcher to Sunak - on the monumental identity crisis of the Conservative Party. We spoke with him. QUESTION: When you published the first edition of your book, September 2021, there were still almost two years to go before Boris Johnson resigned and the Tories still seemed to be doing halfway well. Your thesis that they were electorally in decline was bold to say the least. What did you detect that others had not seen?  ANSWER. It was not so much a prediction about the party itself as about the nature of the electoral coalition built by the Conservatives in the 2010s. In the 2017 general election, it became clear that their base was seniors and, in particular, retirees. This was because they shielded the so-called triple lock (guaranteed pension increase according to the higher of these three variables: inflation, average earnings growth or 2.5%), stimulated the housing market to the benefit of older homeowners (disproportionately in the majority among homeowners), and addressed their concerns about immigration and other external groups.  By contrast, working-age people suffered the consequences of conservative policies: wage stagnation, public sector cutbacks, longer working hours and restricted welfare entitlements. This meant that, sooner or later, the Tories were going to face a crisis of political reproduction, of generational turnover in their support base. Elections in the 2020s would be increasingly difficult to win, even without falling into unnecessary mistakes like Boris Johnson's Partygate [Downing Street parties during the confinement] or Liz Truss's disastrous experiment in cutting taxes without alternative funding. Q. At the end of 2019, Boris Johnson won a landslide majority. No one could have imagined that the legislature would be hell for the Conservatives, with three different prime ministers. What went wrong? "For the Conservatives to win again in the next decade, they would need to reinvent themselves."  A. Despite winning an unexpectedly big victory, the Conservatives didn't know what to do with it. How could they be sure of keeping it? Rhetorically, Boris Johnson had a plan: leave the EU and use the state to drive modernization in the so-called neglected areas of the country outside Greater London and the Southeast.  Unfortunately for him, the pandemic delayed the plan, and when covid gave way to normality, there was little appetite left in the government for an ambitious program of public spending on infrastructure, especially with Rishi Sunak [current prime minister] as finance minister. As a City man before he jumped into politics, Sunak had an instinctive disdain for the state as an engine of growth and provider of public services. And while Johnson was willing to talk about the issue, he was not particularly concerned about not being able to develop his territorial rebalancing plan. Boris preferred the spectacle of looking busy to actually being busy. Despite that, many relevant conservatives thought Johnson was untrustworthy and was becoming increasingly authoritarian, willing to squander political capital by avoiding accountability for the Partygate scandal and shielding his allies in Congress from the consequences of his wrongdoing. It seemed fairly obvious that the Conservatives were not going to win another election with Boris at the helm, so he was removed, but without resolving the key question: now what?  The primaries for the new leadership revolved around what the Conservatives should do. How could they hold together the coalition of voters built by Theresa May and Johnson in 2017 and 2019? Challenger Liz Truss offered huge (unfunded) tax cuts for the wealthy in the hope of boosting the economy and winning back support with a new wave of prosperity. Admittedly, the other challenger, Sunak, warned that this would not work and instead offered careful technocratic management pending better times. After Truss's victory, and his rapid fall, that was exactly what Sunak is doing...with a bonus: toughening anti-immigration policies and attacks on minorities, such as trans people, as a substitute for the ideological cement once offered by Brexit. But, if the polls are anything to go by, his plan is not working. Q. So what has Sunak brought to the table - another style?   A. He promised a stable and responsible government. It looked like a clear break with Truss and Johnson and a return to some degree of normalcy. However, he persisted in the same anti-immigration and anti-Woke policy of his predecessors. The only real difference was the refusal to undertake flashy policies. Sunak hoped (and still hopes) that quiet management of the economy, while doing little or nothing to fix public services, will be enough to secure another Conservative mandate. Q. Is Cameron's return a sign of cycle exhaustion?   A. Sunak certainly surprised everyone by bringing Cameron back to the political forefront. His appointment suggests that there was no one else suitable in the party, but also a return to sensible politics. While it is true that Sunak appointed Home Secretary Suella Braverman [sacked at the same time Cameron was appointed] to make controversial statements on immigrants and asylum seekers (without the Prime Minister having to make them himself), Braverman perhaps went too far: she is held responsible for inciting the far-right mob that rioted on Armistice Day [coinciding with a pro-Palestinian demonstration against which Braverman had bellowed]. Cameron's charisma and salesmanship fluency, at least compared to other Conservative leaders, could (one hopes) attract the Conservative Party's undecideds, who voted for him twice in 2010 and 2015. Former Chancellor George Osborne must be wondering if his phone will be ringing soon, too. Q. Is the Conservative crisis terminal?  A. There are no iron laws in politics. But it does seem that the Conservatives are in a crisis that they are unable to recognize, let alone address. If, as seems highly likely, Labour wins the next election, there is no guarantee that the Conservatives will benefit from opposition. People who dislike the Conservatives now are not suddenly going to forget how the party has treated them since 2010. The Tories might flirt with far-right movements and street mobilizations, as they do now with groups against low vehicle emission zones, or even against covid mitigation and against climate change. But building a viable alternative to Labor on the basis of this policy is extremely unlikely.  For the Conservatives to win again in the next decade, they would need to completely reinvent themselves. Attracting working-age people means offering them something in their interests: higher wages, job guarantees, well-funded public services, abandoning the politics of scapegoating, and a serious commitment to climate change. The problem is that adopting these policies is very difficult, as many of their parliamentarians and members oppose them. For all these reasons, at this point it is almost impossible to envision how the Tories will be able to return to power once they lose it.  You have seen enough movies about the decline of the Roman Empire and Elvis in Las Vegas to recognize an end of cycle: when the Brexit figureheads end up on reality TV and the Brexit defenestrated return to government, you don't need to look at the (disastrous) polls to understand that the British Conservative bloc is in free fall.  Load-Date: December 6, 2023  End of Document
