   Starmer: I served Corbyn – but I never thought he’d win telegraph.co.uk January 18, 2024 Thursday 2:23 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:1 Length: 443 words Byline: By Josh White Highlight: Labour leader says he only served in Corbyn’s shadow cabinet to stop Tory Brexit plans Body   Sir Keir Starmer has admitted he never thought Jeremy Corbyn would win the 2019 general election and only served in his shadow cabinet to stop Conservative Brexit plans.  The Labour leader  said he did not vote for his predecessor but continued in his position as Shadow Brexit Secretary because he felt a “responsibility” to be involved in deciding how Britain would leave the European Union. Speaking on Keir Starmer: Up Close-Tonight, which airs on ITV1 on Thursday, Sir Keir declined to answer whether he wanted Mr Corbyn to be prime minister, but said: “I didn’t think the Labour Party was in a position to win the last election.” He added: “I didn’t, obviously, vote for Jeremy Corbyn in 2015 or 2016. On the contrary, I resigned.” Sir Keir quit as Shadow Minister for Immigration in 2016 in protest at Mr Corbyn’s leadership but later that year took a new post with the Brexit brief that he held for four years. He said he felt a “responsibility” to take up the role and frustrate Tory Brexit policy. During this time he advocated a second referendum on the Britain’s EU membership. “I thought that once that 2016 Brexit referendum had happened, I took the view that what then followed in the next few years was going to be felt for generations,” Sir Keir said. “And that I thought it was my responsibility to play a full part in that.” Labour endured a disastrous defeat in 2019 and since winning the leadership election in 2020 , Sir Keir has moved the party to the Right  and distanced himself from the politics of Mr Corbyn.  He is on course to be the next prime minister with opinion polls predicting a Labour majority  at the next election, which is set to come this autumn. If he wins power, Sir Keir said he is unlikely to be as bold as Tony Blair, the last Labour leader to win a general election, because he would be inheriting a “terrible situation” from the Tories. Sir Keir echoed comments from Rachel Reeves, the Shadow Chancellor, that a Labour government had no intention of taxing top earners and redistributing wealth to the less well-off. “That isn’t how I want to grow the economy,” Sir Keir told ITV. “Of course I believe in redistribution, but I don’t think redistribution is the, sort of, one-word answer for millions of people across the country. “We shouldn’t be saying to them: ‘I’m sorry, we can’t, we don’t have the ambition for you to have that kind ofjob where you are. So I’m afraid it’s just redistribution.’ I think that that fundamentally disrespects individuals.” Ms Reeves hinted to The Telegrap h at the World Economic Forum in Davos on Wednesday that Labour would cut taxes for high earners in a bid to go for economic growth. Load-Date: January 17, 2024  End of Document
