   Starmer's red lines limit room for manoeuvre in revisiting Brexit deal; Refusal to rejoin single market and customs union will hamper removal of trade barriers Financial Times (London, England) September 19, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 1114 words Byline: PETER FOSTER;ANDY BOUNDS Body   Sir Keir Starmer has promised to try to get a "much better" Brexit deal for the UK if he wins the general election expected next year. But although the Labour party leader described the deal negotiated by former prime minister Boris Johnson in 2020 as "far too thin", he has ruled out forming a customs union with the EU and seeking membership of the single market. What could the Labour leader achieve within the Brexit "red lines" that he has set himself? When could Starmer negotiate a reset? Starmer's advisers believe that his election would create a diplomatic inflection point that could allow him to draw a line under eight years of bruising negotiations between London and Brussels under successive Tory governments. Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has already improved relations with the EU, concluding his Windsor framework deal to break the diplomatic deadlock over post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland and taking up membership of the Horizon Europe science exchange programme. Starmer could look to build on this via the five-yearly "implementation review" of the UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA), which can begin from the start of 2026. Can the UK get the EU to improve the TCA? Trade and diplomacy experts warn that while the UK frets about the fallout of the TCA for its exporters, in most European capitals Brexit is yesterday's problem. Senior EU officials say the bloc is now focused on issues such as immigration, net zero, energy security and plans for Ukraine to become a member state. "There's little appetite to reopen the Brexit psychodrama in Brussels," said one, ahead of Starmer's trip to Paris this week to meet French president Emmanuel Macron, which has been touted as laying the early groundwork for a reset. Charles Grant, the director of the Centre for European Reform think-tank warned that the EU side had "many other priorities" and any initiative from a Labour government would require careful framing and a clear "offer". "Before he takes office Starmer needs to work out what he wants to change in the Brexit settlement, and then forewarn EU leaders of what they should expect from Labour," he added. What can the UK offer to the EU? The UK side will have to think carefully about a quid pro quo to unlock more flexibility from the European Commission on trade issues. This could include paying into EU programmes, such as the Erasmus student exchange scheme that Johnson quit, or easier work visas for Europe's young people and students. Other potential areas for deeper cooperation include diplomacy and security. The UK could join the bloc's schemes for financing military aid to Ukraine or sign a defence pact enabling London to contribute advisers to EU peacekeeping missions abroad, such as Operation Althea, which oversees the peace agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Deeper cyber security and intelligence co-operation is another area that would be of value, especially to eastern and Nordic EU States. London could also look to build on an agreement signed last April to co-operate on renewable energy via the North Seas Energy Cooperation, a regional offshore grid co-chaired by the commission. Linking UK carbon-pricing systems with those of the EU would also reduce frictions caused by forthcoming carbon border taxes. London could also offer to share disused North Sea oilfields for carbon capture and storage, a geological asset unique to the UK. Can the TCA be improved within Starmer's red lines? Trade experts say that by ruling out single market membership and a customs union, Starmer has significantly limited how far the post-Brexit trading relationship with the EU can be improved. They also warn that negotiations with Brussels are likely to be protracted and slow, with no sense of emergency on the EU side - unlike in 2019 or 2020 when both sides were trying to avoid a no-deal Brexit. The UK could try to negotiate some improvements for individual sectors of the economy, such as a veterinary agreement to reduce checks on animal and plant products, which would benefit food and drink exporters. Aligning with EU rules will cut red tape and reduce border costs for individual sectors, but would entail the UK following large amounts of regulation without having a say over their creation, risking a political backlash at home. To ease so-called "rules of origin" issues which require products to be around 50 per cent UK-made in order to enter the EU tariff-free, London could seek to join the Pan-Euro-Mediterranean (PEM) Convention, making it easier for British companies with supply chains running through countries such as Turkey, Israel, Morocco and Switzerland to export tariff free to the EU. But Sam Lowe, trade expert at Flint Global, warned this would cut across existing elements of the TCA and would not address some areas of friction, such as the current stand-off between the EU and UK over electric vehicles. Labour has pledged to seek "mutual recognition agreements" on professional qualifications, which Brussels has made with other trade partners, but experts warn that this will take time. It took Canada nine rounds of negotiations and more than a year to secure one deal on architects. London could also take unilateral steps to reduce frictions for business, as it has already by partially recognising the EU "CE" standards mark. It could also speed up its programme to digitise border arrangements. So can Starmer really fix Brexit? Given Starmer's self-imposed red lines on rejoining the single market and a customs union, there are clear limits to how far any future negotiation can remove the barriers to trade erected by the TCA. Some experts warn that the Labour leader's aspirations will quickly get bogged down in negotiations in Brussels while attracting domestic political flak from Conservatives accusing him of betraying Brexit. Others are more optimistic, pointing out that Starmer can present himself as a clean break from the Conservative years. Analysts add that by gearing up to admit Ukraine, Brussels may have to build more flexible arrangements for non-members in the future. Mujtaba Rahman, head of European analysis at the Eurasia Group thinktank, argued that with the right political leadership there could be more space for innovation on the EU side, particularly since Brexit has not tempted other states to seek to leave the bloc. "If Starmer delivers consistent British engagement with the EU, based more on shared values and less on domestic politics, that will create goodwill, which will then underpin the dynamic between the two sides across the board," he said. 'Starmer needs to work out what he wants to change in the Brexit settlement, and then forewarn EU leaders' Graphic    Keir Starmer: advisers believe he can draw a line under eight years of bruising negotiations with the EU, but diplomats warn of little appetite in Brussels to reopen the Brexit 'psychodrama' FT montage; Guillaume Simoneau/Dreamstime Load-Date: September 18, 2023  End of Document
