   Study reveals that Britons want closer ties with the EU, but without reopening Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English December 5, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 370 words Body   A new study has concluded that Britons have become more favorable to a rapprochement with the European Union (EU) in recent years, but want to avoid new discussions about 'Brexit'. The report "Beyond Brexit: perspectives on the future relationship between the UK and the EU", by the British Future research center, presented on Tuesday in London, analyzed the opinions of 2,000 people about the future relationship between the UK and the EU. The authors found that the majority of respondents are currently in favor of greater, more pragmatic collaboration with Brussels in areas of mutual interest, such as security, trade and science. However, say the authors, "there is a sense of public exhaustion on the issue of 'Brexit' and most people are keen to put the disagreements of previous years behind them." "The public would now like a much less heated debate about the future relationship than in the years leading up to and after the referendum," they conclude. The majority of respondents (52%) expected the UK to maintain a closer relationship with the EU, 12% preferred a more distant relationship, while 27% are happy with the current situation. Support for a closer relationship is strongest among supporters of the opposition Labour Party (68%) and those who voted to remain in the EU (81%). The study also asked Britons what they thought about leaving the EU, and 49% of respondents said the UK did badly, 36% think it did well, similar to recent polls. Although the majority of those who voted for 'Brexit' in the 2016 referendum continue to think that leaving the EU was the right decision, 14% indicated that it was wrong. The percentage is lower (7%) than that of voters who voted to remain in the EU, but who have changed their minds and now believe that Brexit was the right decision for the UK. "Whether people are anti-Brexit or pro-EU, I think it's more the former, I think people feel that Brexit hasn't given them an answer," said study co-author Jake Puddle, during the Common Ground EU Citizens' Conference. The British Future analyst said he believes there is "room for new narratives about what the EU can offer the UK and potential to try to unlock and mobilize public support for closer cooperation". Load-Date: December 6, 2023  End of Document
