   Sunak has walked into a trap over the ECHR i-news April 6, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 1002 words Byline: Paul Waugh Body   Whenever a politician says that they have been "very clear" about a topic these days, it is often a telltale sign that they've been as clear as mud. Rishi Sunak used his favourite phrase again this week when asked whether he was prepared to pull the UK out of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) in order to get his deportation flights to Rwanda off the ground. In an interview with The Sun newspaper, the Prime Minister said "on this, I've been very clear" - before then coming up with a carefully worded answer that sounded like he was inching towards withdrawal without actually committing to it. "I believe that all our plans are compliant with all of our international obligations, including the ECHR," Sunak said. "But I do believe that border security, and making sure that we can control illegal migration, is more important than membership of a foreign court because it is fundamental to our sovereignty as a country." That vague formulation was very deliberate (he said it three times almost word for word) and obviously aimed at toughening his image on the issue of illegal migration across the English Channel. The subsequent headlines certainly sounded as if he meant business. "Rishi: I'll quit Euro court" was one example. Yet another rule of thumb of modern politics (and journalism) is that any news story that contains the words "could" or "if " suggests that there is less to it than meets the eye. Lo and behold, it was reported that Sunak "could" fight the election on a promise to pull the UK out of the ECHR, adding that he "threatened" to sever ties with the court "if " it sinks the Rwanda plan. In the end, the slippery small print was more telling than the bluster. One problem for the Prime Minister is that such slipperiness doesn't cut the mustard with those who feel most exercised about the issue. GB News viewers' reactions ranged from "this is just public relations for the election" to "he's always talk but no action". Another problem is that Sunak would almost certainly trigger a split within his own party if he actually put ECHR withdrawal in the Tory manifesto. Many One Nation Conservatives fear that their "Blue Wall" constituents are repulsed by the idea of the idea of making Britain a pariah in international law. Even staunch Brexiteers like Sir David Davis and Dominic Raab have warned that quitting the convention would jeopardise the Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland, as well as undermining our post-Brexit trade deal with the EU. The EU and the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) are two very different bodies, but politicians like Nigel Farage have long yoked them together as bogeymen acting against British interests. Sunak has walked straight into that trap by repeatedly depicting the ECHR as "a foreign court" (or a "Euro court", as The Sun put it). This is despite the fact that the Tory MP and former Nuremberg prosecutor David Maxwell-Fyfe drove its creation in the 1950s, and that a British judge sits on it today. Moreover, it was a British court - the Supreme Court - that ruled last year that the Rwanda plan was unlawful (and crucially talked about its wider breaches of the 1951 United Nations Convention on Refugees, rather than just the ECHR). In a written parliamentary question, Sunak was asked by an SNP MP why he kept referring to the European Court as a foreign court. His curt reply - "Because it is based in Strasbourg" - was greeted with glee by some on the right, but in fact it was a crass answer unworthy of a Prime Minister. Citing the fact that an international court is based in another country as proof of it being "foreign" is as inane as saying that Nato is a "foreign" organisation because its headquarters is in Brussels, that the UN is a "foreign" body because it is based in New York - or that the International Criminal Court (of which the UK is a founding member) is "foreign" because it is based in The Hague. Sunak's constant attacks on the "foreign court" may also prove hugely counterproductive for the simple reason that he is effectively telling millions of Leave voters - eight long years after the EU referendum - that Brexit is still not "done" because "foreigners" are still somehow ultimately in charge of our laws and borders. Speaking of borders, more evidence of a botched Brexit will become apparent on 30 April, when the Government finally imposes checks on animal and plant products coming from the EU. Having delayed it five times, this week ministers announced £145 fees per consignment, prompting trade groups to warn of extra costs for business and higher prices in the shops for consumers. The perception that Brexit has been both incomplete and incompetently handled by the Tories is, of course, ideal messaging for Farage's Reform UK party. Like his "stop the boats" failure, Sunak's blather about the ECHR was a big birthday present for the former Brexit Party and Ukip leader, who marked his 60th this week. In fact, the most telling bit of Sunak's interview this week came when a cab driver challenged him to "put the Navy in the Channel" to tow migrant dinghies back to France. The cabbie said that would be better than "half-a-billion pounds going to Rwanda that could be in the health service or education service". Sunak's answer, that the Navy cannot practically push back small boats, was at least honest about how Reform's apparently simple solutions won't work in practice. It is a shame that he cannot be as honest about the Rwanda plan (that he as chancellor clearly thought wasn't value for money) or withdrawal from the ECHR. But the exchange was also proof that Sunak can never out-Farage Farage. And that in trying to do so, the Prime Minister fuels the impression of both impotence and incompetence. In a general election year, that's a politically fatal combination. Paul Waugh resigned as i's chief political commentator in January to stand as the Labour candidate for Rochdale, a contest won by Azhar Ali Sunak was asked why he kept referring to the European Court as a foreign court Load-Date: April 6, 2024  End of Document
