   Sunak faces Brexiteer backlash over DUP deal telegraph.co.uk January 31, 2024 Wednesday 8:36 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:3 Length: 880 words Byline: By James Crisp, Europe Editor, Nick Gutteridge, Whitehall Correspondent Highlight: Boris Johnson leads criticism, saying that ‘we must retain the courage to diverge from the low-growth European model’ Body   Rishi Sunak faced a Brexiteer backlash over his deal with the DUP  because of fears that it will hamper Britain’s ability to break free from EU rules. The Prime Minister unveiled an agreement under which all new laws will be screened to ensure they do not create extra trade barriers with Northern Ireland.  Boris Johnson led criticism of the pact , warning that it would be a “disaster” if the UK effectively gave up on attempts to set its own standards. Tory MPs also voiced concerns that the deal  will leave Northern Ireland subject to EU rules over which it has no say, and urged Mr Sunak to carry on negotiating. Under the agreement, all new laws applying to Great Britain will be vetted by Whitehall officials to ensure they do not put up trade barriers in the Irish Sea.  Ministers will have to make a statement to Parliament if a Bill will have “significant adverse implications for Northern Ireland’s place in the UK internal market”. Eurosceptics fear the requirement will mean any attempts to diverge from EU rules are rejected by civil servants before they even reach the Commons. Mr Johnson warned against “artificial concerns” about a hard border on the island of Ireland being “used to keep the whole of the UK in alignment with EU rules”. “We must retain the appetite and the courage to diverge from the low-growth ,high-regulation European model,” said the former prime minister. Four years on from Brexit we celebrate the restoration of this country’s democratic power to make its own laws and rules. With those Brexit freedoms we have introduced improved standards for animal welfare, cut taxes on sanitary products, created greater flexibility for cutting… Lord Frost, the former Brexit negotiator, said the UK “needs huge amounts of deregulation and market-focused reform if it is to start growing again”, adding: “Brexit has given us the opportunity to get ahead of that process and, however falteringly, it has in fact already begun. It should not be slowed further.” Dame Priti Patel, a former home secretary, also voiced concerns, telling a Commons debate on the pact: “It is vital that we ensure the ability to diverge”. Other Eurosceptic MPs complained that the agreement does not go far enough before it leaves Northern Ireland subject to EU rules. Theresa Villiers, a former Northern Ireland secretary, said: “The Government needs to continue to negotiate with the EU so that Northern Ireland is no longer subject to single market rules over which it has no vote.” Richard Drax, a senior Tory MP, added: “Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom and they are still subject to EU laws. So there’s that axe still very much grinding away, which we must get rid of.” Despite the concerns, Brexiteer MPs were poised to support the deal after ministers and the DUP told them it would not hamper Britain’s ability to diverge. On Wednesday, members of the European Research Group met in Westminster to discuss concerns about the pact, but did not agree to oppose it. The Telegraph understands Dame Priti told the meeting the Bill would pass and Brexiteers should focus on “holding the Government to account” over its promises about divergence. Chris Heaton-Harris, the Northern Ireland Secretary, told the Commons the deal will “not change the freedoms and powers” the UK has or “reduce our ability to diverge”. MPs will debate and vote on the deal on Thursday, paving the way for the DUP to end its two-year boycott  end its two-year boycott of the Stormont assembly on Saturday. Rishi Sunak has told MPs that getting the region’s government up and running again was crucial to ensuring a “brighter future” for Northern Ireland. Ministers will bring forward legislation affirming Northern Ireland’s place in the UK and guaranteeing its unfettered access to the UK market. They will promise not to sign any more deals with the EU that would create more regulatory barriers between Northern Ireland and Britain. Routine post-Brexit checks on goods shipped from Great Britain to final destinations in Northern Ireland are to be removed as part of the deal. British goods meant for Northern Ireland will go through the Windsor Framework ’s “green lane”, which has been renamed the “UK Internal Market Lane”.  The proportion of shipments undergoing full customs checks in the red lane – which is for goods at risk of onward travel to the EU – will be slashed to 20 per cent. Brussels, whose consent will be required for some of the reductions in checks, said it would “carefully analyse” the details of the agreement. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, has secured his party’s backing to accept the Government’s offer and return to Stormont. “There should not be a border within the UK internal market. These proposals remove that border,” he said, but admitted the deal was not “perfect”. “Boris Johnson promised us a lot of things. He didn’t deliver them. In fairness, and with credit to Rishi Sunak, he delivered where others haven’t,” he said. But his party was split, with Sammy Wilson, one of its most senior MPs, telling the Commons the deal will leave Northern Ireland subject to EU rules over which it has no say. He said: “This is a result of this spineless, weak-kneed, Brexit-betraying Government refusing to take on the EU and its interference in Northern Ireland.” Load-Date: February 1, 2024  End of Document
