   Sunak's pledge to DUP on sea border 'makes a nonsense of Brexit': Allister; PM planning concession to tempt party back to Stormont Belfast Telegraph January 26, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 741 words Byline: Brett Campbell Body   JIM Allister has warned that the Prime Minister's reported offer to sacrifice some of Britain's freedoms in a bid to appease the DUP and restore power-sharing "would make a nonsense of Brexit". It follows reports in the Daily Telegraph that Rishi Sunak has pledged to introduce a requirement that would see all new laws screened to ensure they will not create extra trade barriers in the Irish Sea. Downing Street, which is trying to persuade Sir Jeffrey Donaldson to end his party's two-year boycott of Stormont, has not denied the plan. The move has angered many Brexiteers, including the TUV leader who said changes will only apply to laws over which the UK has retained control - and not the laws it has "surrendered" to the EU. "You are therefore only talking about future British legislation which would apparently guarantee no divergence," Mr Allister said. "This would leave untouched the huge bank of EU laws which already apply to Northern Ireland of which there are hundreds in Annex 2 of the Protocol and the evolution and expansion of those. "Control of that whole aspect of our goods economy has been surrendered to the EU. "The UK Parliament is now in a position where it cannot change any of those. All it can change is its own laws." The North Antrim MLA, who was criticised by the DUP leader in Westminster on Wednesday, said the current situation "illustrates the folly of the surrender of sovereignty which the Protocol involved". "Importantly, for Brexiteers in GB it would make a nonsense of Brexit as the whole of the UK would be tied to things and institutions which they thought they had left," he added. Baroness Kate Hoey said "leaving NI under EU rule is not sustainable" in reaction to the development. A number of influential Tory MPs have warned that the PM's move would make it almost impossible for Great Britain to diverge from EU rules. The UK Business Secretary refused to comment on the issue when challenged by former NI Secretary Theresa Villiers in the House of Commons. "Is (Ms Badenoch) in a position to deny a report in The Telegraph today that the Government has pledged to introduce a requirement that all future regulatory law change will be screened to ensure that they don't create extra trade barriers in the Irish Sea?" Ms Villiers asked. "Because that could be a significant impediment in the way of divergence from EU laws." Kemi Badenoch did not deny that the Government could make concessions. "I can't, of course, comment on the Northern Ireland political process which is ongoing, and which I am not a participant to," the MP for Saffron Walden responded. "However, what I will say is that we retain the ability to diverge. That is clear. And I do agree with her that if we are really to seize the benefits of Brexit we need to find that comparative advantage in our regulations with the EU, otherwise there would be no point." It's understood Mr Sunak's idea has been met with anger by former cabinet minister Sir Jacob Rees-Mogg. "This means we will not diverge at all," he told the Daily Telegraph. The Prime Minister's official spokesman refused to comment "on speculation around private discussions". It has prompted Sinn Féin MLA Declan Kearney to warn the DUP that it's "merry go round of delay has run its course" and urged the party to "wise up and get back to work". "This is a further recognition of the harm that the Tories' failed and reckless Brexit agenda has inflicted on our society and the damage it has contributed to our local economy and public services," he said. Meanwhile, the leader of the UUP said it is now up to Sir Jeffrey "to get his party to accept a deal" in the two-week "window of opportunity left open" by the Secretary of State Chris Heaton-Harris. Doug Beattie referred to his rival facing down critics in the Commons as a bill to extend the deadline for restoring devolution to February 8 was debated. "It [the speech] was full of passion, he was animated and angry," he said. "I listened to the description he gave about the abuse he has received and the threats he has been under. I know what he's talking about. I have been in that position myself." Mr Beattie said it is "imperative that Chris Heaton-Harris lays legislation in the House of Commons so we know how Northern Ireland is going to be governed so we can look to the future and provide public services" should Sir Jeffrey fail. 'The whole of the UK would be tied to things and institutions they thought they'd left' Graphic    TUV leader Jim Allister and Prime Minister Rishi Sunak Load-Date: January 26, 2024  End of Document
