   Super rich alone benefit; Letters East Anglian Daily Times December 9, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 26 Length: 386 words Body   KEMI Banenoch complains about people like me. She opines that those of us who criticise Brexit are "relentlessly wanting to talk down our country." Suella Braverman says the same. Richard Tice, meanwhile, leader of Reform UK party (formerly the Brexit party) accuses Lord Heseltine of actually preventing Brexit from being a success, a perverse thing to suggest since Michael Heseltine has always argued that Brexit could never end www.well.No, it's for the likes of Mr Tice and the Tory Brexiters to make a success of Brexit. And have they? News has just broken that Kemi Banenoch's over-hyped Indo- Pacific trade deal with the CPTPP has been downgraded by the Office of Budget Responsibility. It will now no longer deliver a pathetic 0.08% shot in the arm of UK GDP in 15 years time but an even more pathetic 0.04%. Meanwhile the deals struck with Australia and New Zealand that, even according to Liz Truss, benefits Australians four times more than it does the British, should deliver a toe-curling 0.01% GDP boost. Impressed? I'm not - if this is what 'unleashing' Brexit amounts to then I shudder to think what a damp squib Brexit would look like. None of this even scratches the surface of the 4% hit to UK GDP caused by the wicked con-trick. Sunlit uplands? Yeah, right. But fear not - the 'unleashing' of Brexit benefits is dangled in front of us like a carrot on a stick. It's almost eight years since the event but we mustn't let that worry us. Rishi Sunak still insists that he's going to be doing some serious 'unleashing' sometime soon; well, er... later on. Perhaps. The truth is that Brexit populists have failed to 'unleash' anything of any use to anyone but a tiny minority of the population, the super rich. The architects of it are now shown to be 'all mouth and no trousers'. Heseltine - and the Big Beasts from all three main parties (politicians with maturity, experience and honed judgement, unlike the the populists) - were all spot-on. There is no benefit, only harm. We are poorer. So, instead of sniping from shadows and trying to blame everyone else for their miss-deeds Brexit populists should put their hands up and do something useful for a change - make amends! After all, if there was ever a white rabbit to pull out of the hat we would surely have seen it by now. RICHARD HARE, Woodbridge. Load-Date: December 9, 2023  End of Document
