   The Rwanda plan is not a new Brexit i-news December 15, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 17 Length: 984 words Byline: Sebastian Payne Body   Harold Wilson was fixated on political plotting and intrigue. He spent much of the 1970s in a paranoid state about a notional secret cabal within the security services out to get him. It was therefore apt that his eponymous room in Parliament was the scene for meetings of right-leaning Conservative MPs this week, who ummed and ahhed about whether to back the latest legislative effort to make the Rwanda deportation deal work. Torn between principle and practice, they had to decide whether to kill the bill or reshape it later on. For many, these feverish scenes recalled the darkest days of the Brexit wars - when MPs plotted in every conceivable corner of Westminster in a quest to gain their idealised break with the EU. The continuous stream of impromptu press conferences, tweets, anonymous briefings and dark threats painted a parliamentary party in the grip of a nervous breakdown. Defeat for Rishi Sunak was imminent, with all of the painful political consequences that would ensue. But come Tuesday evening, the rebellion fizzled out quicker than a box of damp fireworks. With not a single Conservative MP ultimately voting against the Rwanda legislation, here was the proof that this was not like Brexit after all. It might be unfair to disturb these festive times with memories of those days when Parliament appeared to be on the precipice, but there are fewer similarities between then and now than appearances suggest. Seeing the likes of Mark Francois popping up on TV has sent his critics into a rage-induced meltdown. But the European Research Group (ERG) of today is emasculated. More mad hatters than mafia dons. Recall that Tory MPs actively voted against Theresa May's Brexit deal several times over. The ERG, then under the auspices of Steve Baker, ran a highly efficient whipping operation that had no qualms about actively voting against such a consequential piece of legislation. Had they opted to bring down May's government, they could have done so. Instead, they wielded the fault line within the Fixed Term Parliament Act to keep her government going while undermining its core purpose. With fixed terms now abolished (thankfully), this would no longer be possible. Plus the ERG's once formidable whipping machine has withered away. The arithmetic in Parliament is also very different from the Brexit years. With a minority government, May had no decisive working majority in the Commons. Sunak, on the other hand, has a notional majority of 56 which can withstand a substantial rebellion. The abstentions this week came to about 29 rebels. It would require every one of them to convert into a hard "no" vote for the Government to lose. Three notable centrist MPs were among the abstainers - Jesse Norman, Tobias Ellwood and Theo Clarke - and all are concerned about undermining international law. But they are unlikely to vote down such legislation when it comes to the next big crunch in January. Yet there is a deeper point about why Rwanda is not Brexit. The debates of 2017-19 were about some of the biggest, most substantive issues facing Parliament. After the Brexit referendum, there was no consensus about what our relationship with Europe should be. Transplanting direct plebiscite democracy on to parliamentary democracy was a distressing process, one that few MPs want to see again in the near future. Then there was scant agreement within the Conservative Party about where the compromises should be made - hence the hours wasted on indicative votes and emergency debates. With Rwanda, however, no Tories disagree on the fundamental principle. The small boats crisis is real, illegal migration matters deeply to voters and the Conservatives pride themselves on being the foremost party of strong borders. Those who are surprised that Lord Cameron supports this should recall the tough actions taken under his two governments to clamp down on illegal migration. Particularly for those 2019 Tory voters who are now lodged in the "undecided" camp, they want to see decisive action if they will be wooed back come the election next year. The nuance of small differences over Rwanda is ultimately about the specific wording of the bill. As Simon Clarke, one of the MPs who abstained this week, put it, the issue is about results. The same is true for Danny Kruger and Miriam Cates, who also rebelled while acknowledging that the legislation "makes some important steps forward". Over the next month, the debate is about an accommodation on tightening up the specific legal aspects. This is why the rebels abstained; not because they were set against the law. As is too often the case in Westminster, division is more gripping to report and stir up than the boring truth. WhatsApp messages ricocheting between MPs and journalists can give the illusion of deeper divides than really exist. With my former lobby journalist hat on, I can attest that drama is always more compelling to write. And in turn, some politicians relish the opportunity to hop into the limelight more than ill-attended debates on the green benches. The predictions of a 100-strong rebellion that frittered into a 44-vote majority for the Government shows the danger of over-briefing. The Rwanda bill is robust and likely to work if it becomes law, as Lord Sumption has argued. There are still a good number of unknowns ahead and, for some Tories, it is far from their preferred route for tackling illegal migration (it's often forgotten that returns deals are just as significant for dealing with small boats). And when the third reading kicks off in January, we can expect another round of briefings and dark threats. But this is not Brexit. Tories agree on the fundamental principle. Intrigue for intrigue's sake is nearly always unhelpful. Sebastian Payne is director of the centre-right think-tank Onward i@inews.co.uk As is too often the case, division is more gripping to report and stir up than the boring truth Load-Date: December 14, 2023  End of Document
