   The strange silence on the disastrous Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English July 25, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 984 words Body   It is increasingly understood in Britain that the country's vote to leave the European Union, a watershed moment in the international rise of reactionary populism, was a grave mistake. As critics predicted, Brexit has led to inflation, labor shortages, business closures and problems with travel. It has created supply chain problems that jeopardize the future of British auto manufacturing. In many cases, Brexit has made travel between Europe and the UK an ordeal, as I recently witnessed when I spent hours in a chaotic passport control queue while taking the train from Paris to London. British musicians are finding it difficult to tour Europe because of the costs and bureaucracy associated with moving people and equipment across borders, which Elton John called "crucifixion." According to the U.K. Office for Budget and Responsibility, leaving the EU has cut British gross domestic product by 4% .  The damage to the British economy, the OBR chairman has said, is of the same "magnitude" as that of the COVID pandemic. All this pain and inconvenience has created an anti-Brexit majority in Britain. According to a YouGov poll published this week, 57% of Britons think the country was wrong to vote to leave the EU, and a slim majority want to be part of it again. Even Nigel Farage, the former leader of the far-right UK Independence Party, sometimes known as "Mr. Brexit," told the BBC in May:  "Brexit has failed." This disaster was, of course, predictable and predicted. That is why I was struck, visiting the UK this summer, by the curious political taboo against talking about how badly Brexit has gone wrong, even among many of those who voted against it. Seven years ago, Brexit was one of the first portents of the revolt against cosmopolitanism that brought Donald Trump to power. (Both undertakings - Britain's divorce from the EU and Trump's reign in the United States - proved catastrophic. Both left their countries fatigued and exhausted. But while the U.S. can't stop talking about Trump, many in the U.K. can barely bear to think about Brexit. "It's so toxic," Tobias Ellwood, a Tory lawmaker who has called on his colleagues to admit that Brexit was a mistake, told me. "People have invested so much time, pain and agony in this." It's like a "wound," he said, that people want to avoid picking at. London Mayor Sadiq Khan, one of the few Labour Party leaders willing to debate the consequences of leaving the EU, described an"omertà," or vow of silence, around it. "It's the elephant in the room," he told me. "It frustrates me that no one is talking about it." Part of the reason no one - or almost no one - is talking about the consequences of Brexit lies in the demographics of the Labour Party. Between a quarter and a third of Labour voters supported Brexit, and those voters are concentrated in the so-called Red Wall: working-class areas of the Midlands and northern England that once solidly supported Labour but tacked to the right in the 2019 election. "Those voters don't want to have a conversation about Brexit," said Joshua Simons, director of Labour Together, a think tank close to the Labour leadership. Sheer exhaustion also contributes to the unwelcome talk of Brexit: Between the vote to leave the EU in 2016 and the final deal in 2020, the issue consumed British politics, and many people just want to move on. Simons argues that there is also a third factor: the feeling that the results of a democratic referendum should be respected. He cites an observation that one of his mentors, political philosopher Danielle Allen, made after the 2016 vote. "In the end, in democracy, sometimes everyone together does crazy things," Simons said.  "And what becomes more important is not whether the craziness was good or bad. It's that they do it together." As someone from a much more polarized country, I found this idea somewhat odd. If the Trumpist electorate had imposed such a costly and ultimately unpopular policy on the country, I suspect the Democrats would be quick to reverse it. But in the UK, referendums - which are rare and only held to address important issues - have a political gravitas that an outsider like me finds hard to understand. "You have to respect the referendum," says Khan.  "What you can't have are never-endums, referendum after referendum after referendum after referendum. That disrespects the electorate." Still, he argues that without addressing the damage Brexit has caused, the country cannot move forward: "Unless you can diagnose what the problem is, how can there be a prognosis?". Britain is not going to rejoin the EU, at least in the short term.  But both Khan and Ellwood argue that it can still forge closer trade and immigration ties than it does now, and perhaps eventually return to the European single market, the trade agreement that encompasses the EU countries, Norway, Switzerland, Iceland and Liechtenstein. "After the next election, I see all parties embracing the idea of rejoining the single market," Ellwood said, adding:  "My money is on it happening in the next five years." One of the positive aspects of Brexit is that it sets an example for the rest of Europe. After Britain voted to leave the EU in 2016, there have been fears among some who worry about the European project that France or Italy could be next. But as The Guardian reported, as of January, support for leaving the EU has declined in all member states for which data is available.  As governments across the continent move to the right, the EU itself is moving in a more conservative direction, but not crumbling. "I don't think other EU countries will abandon it, if only because they have seen the impact it has had on us," says Khan. But there is a bigger lesson, one that most Western countries seem to have to continually relearn. Right-wing nationalist projects begin with loud and extravagant ostentation.  They usually come to an appalling end. c.2023 The New York Times Company Load-Date: July 27, 2023  End of Document
