   The rich also suffer from Brexit: British art market plummets CE Noticias Financieras English September 21, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 809 words Body    "Nine and a half million for a Titian. Nine and a half million. Those were the last words pronounced last December by Lord Dalmeny, chairman of Sotheby's in the United Kingdom, before giving the hammer blow and awarding for that figure a two-meter long canvas with a version of Venus and Adonis painted in 1555 by Titian and members of his workshop.  This is, according to experts, a ridiculous price, absolutely derisory for an artist of Titian's stature. Nine and a half million pounds is equivalent to about 11 million euros. A far cry from the 16.9 million dollars (almost 16 million euros) that in 2011 was paid for the Sacra Conversazione of the Renaissance painter.  That's the way things are. The reality is that the art market is reeling in Britain since the Brexit.  The data speak for themselves. In 2021, the year the UK's exit from the European Union became effective, art sales in the UK fell to $11.3 billion, forcing the country to cede to China the second place as the world's most important art market, with the United States occupying the top step of the podium. Britain, it is true, regained the second position in 2022, scoring $11.9 billion in sales. But the figure is still lower than the $12.2 billion that art brought to Britain's coffers in 2019, when there was still no Brexit. Sotheby's UK profits collapsed 24 percent last year.  Signs are piling up showing just how hard the EU exit is proving to be for the British art market. Sotheby's UK profits collapsed by 24 percent last year, from £34.5 million earned in 2021 to £26.2 million in 2022, and auction house officials are quick to point to Brexit and the massive bureaucracy that accompanies it as one of the main causes of those poor results.  Another indicator is the poor performance of the spring auctions in London, where the most expensive pieces come out. The value of sales made in spring 2023 was 39% worse than in 2018.  In addition, three major British art fairs have been canceled: Masterpiece London, Art & Antiques Fair Olympia and Art & Antiques in Birmingham (the first one decided to close after, because of the Brexit, 60% of its European exhibitors decided not to attend).  "London and New York used to be the world's art powerhouses," reads the report on the state of the art market in Britain by a House of Lords committee, noting how art "generated more value for the UK economy than the life sciences, aerospace and automotive industries combined." However, this is no longer the case. And, although the House of Lords report makes no mention of Brexit at any point, it is clear to everyone that it is largely to blame. Transporting works of art from an EU country to Britain requires compiling endless forms, filling out documents and customs declarations and paying VAT.  The red tape and enormous bureaucracy generated by the UK's exit from the EU have undoubtedly had a major impact on the British art market. After all, Brexit put an end to the free movement of goods between the EU and the UK, so galleries, dealers, collectors and anyone else who wants to transport artwork from an EU country to Britain is forced to compile endless forms, fill out documents and customs declarations and pay VAT. And all that, as well as costing money, takes time, which means that the arrival of paintings and sculptures can be delayed by weeks.  "The increased bureaucracy resulting from Brexit is negatively affecting our ability to transport works between the United Kingdom and the European Union," complains for example BidFair, the company that since 2019 has control of Sotheby's.  It is true that transactions between the UK and the rest of Europe only represent 20% of the British art market. The bulk of its revenues come from the sale of pieces imported from elsewhere in the world. But there, too, Brexit is wreaking havoc...  Before Brexit, the UK was the gateway to the EU for works of art from non-European countries, because its VAT rate was the lowest - 5% - on the continent. Thus, paintings and sculptures entered Great Britain and, from there, could then travel to other European countries without additional costs. Now this is no longer the case, and it is France (whose VAT rate is 5.5%) that is taking over this role. So much so that some experts believe that Paris could take the title of European art capital from London. It won't happen immediately, because France now accounts for only 7% of the world art market, compared to Britain's 18%. But the trend is clear: the UK as an art market is in decline.  "Nine and a half million for a Titian. Nine and a half million." Those were the last words uttered last December by Lord Dalmeny, chairman of Sotheby's in the UK, before hammering down the hammer and auctioning for that figure a two-meter-long canvas of a version of Venus and Adonis painted in 1555 by Titian and members of his workshop.  Load-Date: September 22, 2023  End of Document
