   Theresa May was a serious politician, whose legacy was to make politics less serious The Sunday Times (London) March 10, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 22 Length: 1158 words Byline: Robert Colvile Body   So farewell then, Theresa May.The former prime minister has become the latest Tory to step down at the election. Instantly, the consensus snapped into place. Lord Cameron of Chipping Norton praised "the most dedicated of public servants". Rishi Sunak paid tribute to "a relentless campaigner, a fiercely loyal MP to the people of Maidenhead" who "defines what it means to be a public servant". This is the myth that has crystallised around May. A figure who even when she was in office seemed like something from the past. The vicar's daughter. The fields of wheat. Meeting her husband at a Tory party disco. Bonding over a fondness for cricket. The passion for John Lewis. A former prime minister with no entourage, no global institute, no money-grubbing entanglements with billionaires or autocrats or American headbangers. An MP so dedicated to her constituency that she announced her departure in the local paper. Just a shame about that whole Brexit thing. But seeing May as an archaic figure ? a Malory Towers head girl who accidentally found herself in Downing Street ? misses so much about her. For one thing, there is her extraordinary inscrutability. A friend of mine once complained, after sitting through a dinner with her, that she was the only person you could talk to for two hours and end up knowing less well than when you sat down. Yet in all sorts of ways we are living in a country that Lady May made. It's often forgotten now, but May started out as a moderniser. She was the one who told the Tories that too many voters thought of them as the "nasty party". She helped set up Women2Win, which produced a new generation of female Conservative candidates. As home secretary she confronted the Police Federation, forcing it to accept reform alongside austerity ? contributing to a halving of crime under the Tories (excluding fraud). That modernising strain was also evident in her devotion to fighting modern slavery, the cause she made her own. Yet May was also a moderniser in the sense that she moved politics closer to where we are today. It was under her, for example, that the present dismal pattern of immigration policy was set: the Home Office tries its best to stop people coming in, often to the point of what the left denounces as cruelty (especially after the Windrush disaster), while the other big departments welcome them with open arms. Cameron would lament privately that his home secretary was the only other senior minister who actually cared about reducing migration. May came to resent Cameron and George Osborne as posh boys who didn't take her seriously. But she had the last laugh. During the Brexit campaign she remained essentially invisible ? eventually endorsing Remain with all the hostage-video enthusiasm of Jeremy Corbyn. And then, after Michael Gove knifed Boris Johnson, and Andrea Leadsom knifed herself, she found herself the last woman standing. May's tenure as prime minister was a disaster ? even in comparison with what followed. Well before the 2017 election, Whitehall had ground to a halt because of the attempt to channel the entire business of government through two or three people in No 10. But she was, at least at first, popular, presenting herself as a breath of fresh air, with a new focus on the "just about managing" voters ignored by her patrician predecessors. Indeed, despite the epic face-plant of the 2017 election campaign, she ended up winning over a huge number of working-class voters, albeit while losing just as many of the middle classes. In other words, the great Brexit-driven transformation of the Tories began on her watch. Yet this change of tack also set an alarming precedent. May turned on her predecessors, even firing Osborne outright. And she turned on the Thatcherites. In her first conference speech as leader, she argued that it was "time to reject the ideological templates provided by the socialist left and the libertarian right and to embrace a new centre ground in which government steps up ? and not back ? to act on behalf of us all". In other words, the jokers to the right were just as dangerous as the clowns to the left. If you're looking to understand why the Tories haven't been all that Tory recently, the May years are a pretty good starting point. But they also had other consequences. First, May set the template for new Tory leaders to disown their predecessors. In due course, Johnson would treat her as she treated Cameron: a discredited dead end. Two prime ministers later, the Tories have struck out in new directions so often, run against their own record so frequently, there are few places left to go. Then there was the 2017 election. The social care plan that was sprung on cabinet, and the nation, has gone down as one of the great blunders of our age. But the assumption that the party was bound for a landslide, so didn't need to bother bribing the public with tax cuts, meant May's team could also be honest about the challenges facing our country. The manifesto acknowledged (clumsily) that people might actually have to pay for some of their social care. It pledged to dilute the triple lock. It promised to means-test winter fuel payments to pay for the NHS. In short, it accepted that the Ponzi scheme under which the young pay ever more to support the old had to end at some point. Given the electoral disaster that followed, no senior politician has come close to making such arguments again. Today both main parties are committed to fiscal plans that essentially wish such pressures away. The idea that you can be honest with the voters has been comprehensively discredited. Then, of course, there's Brexit. Perhaps it's wrong to blame May for the years of bitterness that followed, as British politics slowly tore itself into two intractable camps. But she definitely didn't help. By the end of her tenure, not only was Brexit unresolved, but the polarisation between Leave and Remain had become the central fact of politics ? and it remains hugely important today. Perhaps May's most consequential legacy, however, will be one that got only a fraction of the parliamentary attention. The Climate Change Act 2008 (2050 Target Amendment) Order 2019 was not even voted on ? it sailed through the Commons with a cheery, unanimous "Aye!" Yet it made the UK the first big economy to commit itself to complete carbon neutrality by 2050. Her chancellor, Philip Hammond ? by then in open mutiny ? warned that it could cost more than £1 trillion. But May was desperate for a legacy, and her Tory opponents were desperate for her to go. Thus an extraordinary, generational economic transition was simply nodded through unscrutinised. But then, perhaps that's the perfect summary of May's legacy. A serious woman with a serious purpose, who did as much as anyone ? deliberately or accidentally ? to ensure that we are governed in a way that is sometimes very unserious indeed. Her extraordinary climate act was nodded through without scrutiny Load-Date: March 10, 2024  End of Document
