   To EU’s leaders, poison released by David Cameron’s Brexit blunder has lost its sting thetimes.co.uk November 19, 2023 Sunday 12:01 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 1281 words Byline: Peter Conradi, Europe Editor Body   For many of Europe’s leaders, Lord Cameron of Chipping Norton will always be remembered as a gambler who called an unnecessary vote on his country’s future and then proceeded to lose it. Yet to most of them the Brexit referendum already seems like ancient history as the new foreign secretary seeks to build on a recent improvement in Britain’s relations with the European Union. “Europe has moved on,” said Jacob Kirkegaard, a senior fellow in the Brussels office of the German Marshall Fund, a think tank. “People here agree Cameron was probably one of the most disastrous prime ministers that the UK has had for many years, given how his premiership ended. But that’s not necessarily something that will jeopardise his new role.” The  appointment of Cameron last week  — making him the eighth British foreign secretary in a decade — was greeted in European capitals with surprise and also an appreciation of his experience and wide range of contacts. Such sentiments have been tempered, though, by expectations that his tenure will be limited, given the government’s likely defeat in the next election. “Welcome back,” tweeted Mark Rutte, the outgoing Dutch prime minister and a former ally, within minutes of the announcement. Annalena Baerbock, the German foreign minister, said she was looking forward to working with her new British opposite number “guided by the close partnership between our countries within Nato, the G7, and in the context of the EU-UK relationship which is more important than ever”. The emphasis in Brussels has shifted since the Brexit vote in June 2016 and the often poisonous wrangling that followed under the premierships of Theresa May, Boris Johnson and Liz Truss. The main preoccupations these days lie to the east: the  war in Ukraine , the question of when that country and its neighbours will become members of the EU and, more recently, Israel’s war in Gaza. Ukraine is top of Cameron’s priorities, too, as he demonstrated with  a surprise two-day visit to Kyiv and Odesa  starting on Wednesday, during which he vowed to give his hosts the moral, diplomatic and, “above all the military support that you need not just this year and next year, but however long it takes”. The appointment of such a political heavyweight has nevertheless been welcomed in Europe as a sign of Rishi Sunak’s determination to continue the process of “normalising” relations with the EU that began under James Cleverly, who, after just 14 months in the job, has been promoted to home secretary. Cleverly had been appointed by Truss, who, when asked towards the end of her own time as foreign secretary whether she considered President Macron of France as “friend or foe”, had notoriously replied: “The jury is out.” But Cleverly himself quickly struck a different, more conciliatory tone and has been widely praised for his diplomatic skills. Catherine Colonna, the French foreign minister, is a particular fan. “Cleverly has done a lot to repair relations, at least at the bilateral level between France and the UK and other member states,” said Georgina Wright, of Institut Montaigne, a Paris think tank. Matters have been further improved since Sunak replaced Truss as prime minister last October, with a key role played by the Windsor framework to regulate Northern Ireland’s status post Brexit, which he signed in February with Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission. Sylvie Bermann, who as French ambassador to London from 2014-17 observed Cameron close up, was as surprised as everyone else by the return of a figure whose political career seemed over. Yet she believes he will continue to contribute to the “warming of relations” between the two countries. “He was appreciated by his European counterparts, because he was always very courteous and never took extreme positions on domestic or foreign policy,” she said. “Though he did make a mistake in calling the referendum.” Cameron had made the error over the preceding years, she believes, of pandering to the Eurosceptics in the Conservative Party, only then to reverse course and back Remain when it came to the vote — which he was then overconfident of winning. Bermann particularly recalled how he rejected offers of help from other EU leaders, assuring them that a majority would vote to remain. For Europe, the main significance may be not so much the appointment of Cameron but instead Cleverly’s support for Britain’s continued membership of the European Convention on Human Rights — a point he reiterated during his first appearance as home secretary after the Supreme Court ruled that  the government’s Rwanda plan  unlawful. This put him at odds with his predecessor, Suella Braverman, who has repeatedly spoken of leaving the convention. Aspects of Britain’s relationship with the EU, including co-operation on justice and policing and the Good Friday agreement on Northern Ireland, are predicated on British membership of the convention, said Charles Grant, director of the Centre for European Reform. “It’s not just an emotional thing, it really matters to the EU,” he said. It will not be all plain sailing between Britain and the EU, however: the continued passage of small boats across the Channel, though slowed by the winter weather, retains the scope to spark a political flare-up. Also looming is a dispute over electric vehicles, which, if not resolved, could lead to a punitive 10 per cent tariff being imposed next year by the EU on British-made models. The status of Gibraltar, too, remains unresolved, given a disagreement between Britain and Spain over the status of its airport. Although Cameron’s legacy in Brussels will be coloured by his fateful decision to call the Brexit referendum, most of Europe’s leaders have come to power in the years since while he was away from politics. At the time Cameron quit in July 2016, Macron was the French minister for the economy. He had just formed his own political movement but had yet to launch what appeared an unlikely campaign for the French presidency. Cameron’s main ally, Angela Merkel, who ultimately failed to give him the concessions he had hoped might help secure a win for Remain, has long since been replaced as German leader by Olaf Scholz, who at the time was merely mayor of Hamburg. Giorgia Meloni, now the prime minister of Italy, had recently failed to get elected as mayor of Rome. One past sparring partner — and Brexit critic — whom Cameron will encounter in his new job is Donald Tusk, who was president of the European Council at the time of the vote and  is expected to become Polish prime minister  in the next few weeks following last month’s election. “I asked David Cameron, ‘Why did you decide on this referendum, this — it’s so dangerous, so even stupid, you know,’” Tusk recalled in a BBC documentary screened in 2019. When I met Tusk on the campaign trail last month he continued to dismiss Brexit as a “huge political mistake”. Nor was the problem just the referendum itself — and Cameron’s apparent belief he could win it without breaking sweat. According to Grant, the decision to hold the vote followed a series of unforced errors by the former prime minister. These included pulling Conservative MEPs out of the centre-right European People’s Party even before he became prime minister in 2010 and launching a doomed attempt to stop Luxembourg’s Jean-Claude Juncker becoming president of the European Commission four years later. Most fundamentally, Cameron badly misjudged how much he could reform the EU in the run-up to the Brexit referendum. “He was disliked for not being clubbable, he stood apart and didn’t really get how the EU worked,” said Grant. “He was a bit of a British bull in an EU china shop.” Load-Date: November 18, 2023  End of Document
