   Top EU commissioner is blasted after saying 'Gibraltar is Spanish' with a former head of Britain's Royal Navy accusing him of 'grandstanding' - as fury builds over the European official's 'incomprehensible' statement MailOnline April 5, 2024 Friday 9:55 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 838 words Byline: Lettice Bromovsky Body   Admiral Lord Alan West has blasted Margaritis Schinas for 'grandstanding' Mr Schinas claimed 'Gibraltar is Spanish' at a briefing yesterday in Seville Britain has been locked in talks over the future of Gibraltar since it left the EU A top EU commissioner has been accused of 'grandstanding' by the former head of Britain's Royal Navy after he said that 'Gibraltar is Spanish'. Margaritis Schinas, a vice-president of the European Commission, made the comments at a breakfast briefing yesterday in Seville which have already been rebuked as 'incomprehensible' by Spain's foreign minister, José Manuel Albares. Now, Admiral Lord Alan West has also blasted Mr Schinas, claiming that he is using the ongoing critical talks between Britain and Spain to 'grandstand'. He said: 'The status of Gibraltar is not up for debate. The people of Gibraltar have made it very clear that they wish to remain in their current state which is as a satellite of the United Kingdom.' He added that it is best to discuss your views during a meeting rather than 'make statements that are clearly grandstanding.' Lord West continued: 'There is no doubt that Brexit negotiations and the fact that we left Europe have left a number of thigs to be resolved, but I think that it is in the interest of Spain and Gibraltar and all of us for it to be resolved without any ranker or any difficulty.  READ MORE: No10 says UK will NOT bow to Spanish demand for control of Gibraltar airport in post-Brexit wrangling 'There is no doubt that that southern part of Spain depends very heavily for their wealth on people going and working in Gibraltar. A huge number go in and out every day so I think it is rather unfortunate he is making an issue of this.  'There needs to be some sensible negotiations moving ahead. I mean, there are issues to do with the airfield and the and that sort of thing which all have to be resolved. And it's in the interest of everyone that that's resolved. Sensibly and with as little fuss as possible.' Mr Schinas' remarks have already been rebuked by Spain's foreign minister after he joked that 'Gibraltar was Spanish', amid ongoing talks with Britain over the future of the territory. José Manuel Albares called the remarks by Margaritis Schinas 'very unfortunate and incomprehensible'. During the meeting Schinas said in response to questions about the future of Gibraltar: 'I can more comfortably say 'Gibraltar Español' after Brexit.' Britain has been locked in talks over the status of the overseas territory - which has a land border with Spain - since Britain left the EU.  However recently discussions have stalled because Spain has insisted that the UK cede jurisdiction over Gibraltar's airport, which is on an RAF base, for an agreement to be reached.  READ MORE: Spain demands jurisdiction over Gibraltar airport as part of post-Brexit border settlement - with locals saying they face 'catastrophe' while Madrid holds a gun to their head There are also tensions over the role of Spanish police. 'We have reached a formula which would mean Frontex (the EU border agency) would manage the border on behalf of the EU, overseen by Spanish officials,' Vice-Admiral Sir David Steel, the governor of Gibraltar said. 'What does 'overseen' look like? We must ensure that it doesn't stretch into sovereignty that it does not exceed what we can accept in terms of jurisdiction and control.' On the other side, Spain has accused Britain of 'quibbling' over small details, saying the UK's approach has been 'penny-wise and pound-foolish'.  Albares and Maros Sefcovic, the European Commission vice-president who is leading the Gibraltar talks, responded by issuing a joint statement criticising Schinas's words. They said: 'The negotiations between the EU and the United Kingdom regarding Gibraltar are progressing as planned.'  Speaking on Spain's state broadcaster RTVE on Thursday night, Albares said: 'I have spoken with Commissioner Schinas regarding those statements he made, which seem very unfortunate and incomprehensible to me because Commissioner Schinas is not at all involved in the dossier of the withdrawal agreement concerning Gibraltar'. He added Schinas's had 'told me that it was not his intention, that he regretted it, that, well, he did not have all the information and, basically, he apologised for it.' Lord Cameron, the UK foreign secretary, is expected to meet Albares and Fabian Picardo, Gibraltar's chief minister, in Brussels next week to continue the talks. In theory, Gibraltar - home to more than 32,000 people - is currently outside the EU's customs union and not under free movement rules. However, Madrid has granted a temporary exemption for workers and tourists to avoid disruption on the narrow peninsula that jets off Spain's southern coast - leaving the overseas territory in a state of limbo since Brexit. The temporary agreement could be rescinded by Spain at any time, and so the negotiations are working towards agreeing common travel between Gibraltar and the EU's Schengen zone, which would remove most border controls. Load-Date: April 5, 2024  End of Document
