   Tories' approach puts devolution 'under threat', minister tells MPs i-news March 12, 2024 SC1 Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 487 words Byline: Katrine Bussey Body   A Scottish Government minister has warned that devolution is "under threat as never before" as he accused Tories at Westminster of taking an "increasingly interventionist approach" to politics. Holyrood's External Affairs Secretary Angus Robertson told MPs on the Scottish Affairs Committee as it met in Edinburgh that prior to Brexit successive UK governments had "generally and rightly recognised that devolved matters were the responsibility of devolved institutions". He said that since the vote to leave the European Union (EU) in 2016 UK ministers had adopted an "increasingly interventionist approach into devolved policy matters". Mr Robertson said that had led to an "erosion of the protections provided to devolved institutions", adding there had been a "hollowing out" of the Sewel Convention - which sets out that the UK should not legislate in devolved areas without the consent of the devolved administrations. "This is something that the UK Government has decided to do, it has chosen to override the Scottish Parliament withholding consent and in many cases the Welsh Senedd not granting consent too," he said. He told the MPs that the "effect of the UK Government's actions is to constrain the powers and responsibilities of devolved institutions". Mr Robertson (inset) stressed it had "not always been so", he added that the "position has deteriorated badly since 2016 as a consequence of Brexit, so much so that the very existence of devolved government is under threat as never before". He said the problem was not just confined to Scotland, saying similar concerns had been raised in Wales. His comments came as the First Minister prepared to attack Labour and the Tories over Brexit. Humza Yousaf will give a speech today at the London School of Economics, where he is expected to claim that spending on Scotland's public services would be £1.6bn higher if the UK was still in the EU. Scottish independence, he will say, would result in a return to the EU for Scotland and an increase in living standards. "A combination of the economic powers that come with independence together with EU membership will be a powerful driver of better living standards and a fairer, stronger Scottish economy," he is due to say. He will quote research from the National Institute for Economic and Social Research. "Around 60 per cent of spending in Scotland is on devolved services. With the same level of borrowing and taxation, that means without Brexit devolved spending power for our vital public services, such as the NHS, could have been £1.6bn higher than it is today. "In other words, Scotland has suffered an estimated £1.6bn cut that could have been invested in our NHS because of a Brexit that people in Scotland overwhelmingly rejected." Angus Robertson said that "more often than not" letters from Scottish ministers asking for meetings "aren't even replied to". He added that "that's the norm, unfortunately, with things". Load-Date: March 12, 2024  End of Document
