   Unionists are in decline after a Brexit blunder i-news January 31, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 9 Length: 1009 words Byline: Patrick Cockburn Body   The decision by the DUP to return to the powersharing Executive and Assembly after agreeing to a deal with the UK Government on post-Brexit trade barriers is important because it symbolises historic long-term changes in Northern Ireland. In the near future, Michelle O'Neill, Sinn Féin's vice president, will take up her job as First Minister of Northern Ireland. This will be the first time that a Catholic/nationalist has been elected to such a position in the hundred years since Northern Ireland was created. Catholics used to denounce it as "a Protestant state for a Protestant people", so the appointment of O'Neill underlines the transformation of its politics. The deal which led to the DUP deciding to go back to Stormont is being sold by its leadership as a victory for unionism, abolishing checks on goods moving from the rest of the UK into Northern Ireland. Asked if this meant the removal of the Irish Sea border, part of the Northern Ireland Protocol long denounced by the DUP, its leader Jeffrey Donaldson said: "For the movement of goods within the United Kingdom, the protocol of course imposed severe restrictions on the movement of those goods. These arrangements remove those restrictions." Donaldson is probably overselling the new deal which must be acceptable to the EU. The fact that its text is not to be released until today suggests that the UK Government wants to give Donaldson time to put his own triumphal spin on it. It may also be significant that, at the time of writing, the size of the majority by which the DUP executive voted for the deal has also not been published, suggesting that the party remains deeply divided over it. Opposition will be fierce and may be effective. For all the furore which led to the DUP withdrawing from the Northern Ireland Executive two years ago, the rows over the protocol, which effectively left Northern Ireland inside the EU single market, lacks substance. They are essentially about how trade should be regulated and policed, not the protocol itself. In any case, the trade issue has always been subsidiary to the "constitutional issue" - how far the Union with Britain is under threat. Underlying this question is the centuries-old conflict between Catholics and nationalists, on one hand, and Protestants and unionists, on the other. Religious and political allegiance are not identical - by no means do all Catholics oppose the Union, for one thing - but they usually run together. Every political issue in Northern Ireland is hard fought, regardless of its true significance, so real change is often submerged by trivia and supposed threats to the Union wildly exaggerated. Unsurprisingly, the DUP is being accused of betrayal over the latest deal by even harder-line unionists. Such infighting is in keeping with unionist political behaviour in recent decades, which has been typified by extreme disunity with party leaders routinely overthrown, defections to other unionist parties and accusations that any hint of compromise is hidden betrayal. Donaldson will try to stop the latest deal provoking rancorous splits in his party, but he may not succeed, going by past precedent His problem is that many unionists have never accepted their loss of dominance in the years since the first civil rights marches by Catholics took place in 1968. What was once excoriated by Catholics as the "orange state", named after the highly sectarian Orange Order, was ended by the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, after 30 years of low-level warfare, commonly called The Troubles. Violence may have largely come to an end in the following 25 years, but sectarian animosities and rivalries are almost as powerful as ever. The Good Friday Agreement (GFA) might have remained an acceptable framework, which did not fully satisfy either community but was one they could live with. But in 2016, the DUP, by now the largest unionist party, made a colossal blunder by backing Brexit in the belief that this would restore a "hard border" between the six counties of the North and 26 counties of the Republic of Ireland. If the former was outside the EU and the latter inside, so the DUP imagined, then it seemed to follow that a full international frontier would once again partition the island of Ireland. The DUP turned out to have miscalculated the degree to which the balance of power was skewed towards the EU and against the UK Government. Like many who pride themselves on trusting nobody, the DUP leaders ended up by trusting exactly the wrong person: Boris Johnson. He promised them there would be no Irish Sea border and then agreed to just that. Brexit, which the DUP had supposed would secure the Union with Britain, did the precise opposite. Many of the "concessions" over trade barriers that the DUP is congratulating itself today on extracting from the UK Government are cosmetic changes geared to persuade the unionist electorate that Brexit was not quite the disaster for the Union that it has turned out to be. The unionist and Protestant position in Northern Ireland has been slowly eroding. Census figures published in 2022 showed that for the first time there were more Catholics than Protestants. In the Assembly election the same year, Sinn Féin became the largest party with the DUP second, giving Michelle O'Neill the right to be first minister with a deputy first minister drawn from the DUP, though both have equal authority. The DUP agreement to go back into the Executive is positive, but too much can be made of it. There will be an administration in place again, but a deeply divided one. When it was up and running in the past it was both incompetent and allegedly corrupt. There may be more Catholics than Protestants, each community being about one million-strong, but this does not open the door to Irish unity. The GFA power-sharing system means that unless the DUP and Sinn Féin have a political transfiguration, few decisions will be made. Northern Ireland is changing, but the pace is slow. There will be an administration in place again in Northern Ireland, but a deeply divided one Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
