   Unleash more Brexit freedoms to drive economic growth The Express October 13, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 737 words Byline: Ross Clark Body   THE CHAMPAGNE may not be flowing, the cash registers are not exactly ringing. Nevertheless, the UK economy has once again defied the prophets of doom by failing to shrink in August. The Office for National Statistics registered growth of 0.2 per cent over the month, and 0.3 per cent over the last three months. That is unexciting growth by any measure - and needs to be read in conjunction with population growth of 0.3 per cent a year. We are a long way from the boom years, and it's possible the economy will yet slump into recession next year. Even so, it's remarkable how the economy has so far proved the country's supposed biggest brains wrong. In November 2022, the Office of Budgetary Responsibility - yes, the body of wise men and women whom Liz Truss and Kwasi Kwarteng were eviscerated by for failing to consult before their disastrous mini- Budget - predicted the UK economy would shrink by 1.4 percent over the course of 2023. Not to be outdone, the Bank of England forecast a contraction of 1.5 per cent over 2023 followed by a further plunge of one per cent in 2024. It also predicted a recession lasting more than two years - longer than in 2008-09. The International Monetary Fund was at it, too. JANUARY, it predicted the UK economy would shrink by 0.6 per cent this year, making it the world's worst-performing economy. Clearly, there is some deep flaw in the crystal balls of these organisations, but what? It's hard to argue that part of the problem isn't Brexit. Many economists working for public bodies remain so convinced it's a disaster it is colouring their analysis. They simply cannot bring themselves to believe Britain is not suffering while other EU countries roar ahead without us. Yet recent revisions by the ONS suggest the UK economy regained its pre-pandemic size two years ago and now stands 1.8 per cent higher than it did prior to the pandemic. That means it has performed better than France or Germany - not by a lot, but a world away from the infamous claims by George Osborne in May 2016 that the UK economy would plummet by up to six percent two years after a Brexit vote. But let's face it, we're not booming either. While the pandemic has muddied the waters, we're probably in much the same position now as in the parallel universe where we voted to remain in the EU. But why aren't we doing better? A lukewarm economy is better than a shrinking one, but still no cause for celebration. Many households are highly strained as inflation cuts into budgets. And it's a long way from the post-war years, when most were able to take it for granted we would get a little better off year on year. Some of the reasons for low growth are common to many developed countries. We have an ageing population. Our public finances are groaning with debt, making it hard for the Government to invest and pushing taxes higher, which compromises the ability of the private sector to invest. A services-based economy, by its very nature, is harder to grow than a manufacturingbased one. You can rationalise and automate a factory to produce more output, but it is much harder, say, for a hairdresser to increase productivity when they can only attend to one customer at a time. But it's hard to argue the UK has seized many Brexit benefits. There are some examples: the Government has relaxed the rules on testing of gene-edited crops, which in time could revolutionise some areas of agriculture, but which could not have happened while bound by the EU's precautionary principle. Yet overall, we remain a high tax, highly regulated economy on the European model. We could be liberalising labour markets, pushing down taxes on business in order to attract investment, yet instead we have raised corporation tax. N OR DOES there seem to be a lot of debate within the Tory party as to how we should take advantage of Brexit. The drive to promote faster growth seems to have died along with Liz Truss' brief administration. The aftermath of Brexit was always going to be asymmetric. The disadvantages, such as greater friction in trade, were going to occur immediately whereas the advantages, such as the ability to deregulate, were always going to take time. Britain has survived the first phase with little economic damage. The challenge now is to show the whole business of Brexit was worthwhile by using our new-found freedoms to greater effect than we have done so far. 'It's remarkable the economy has proved so many wrong' Graphic    WRONG: Doomsday predictions of a six per cent dip post-Brexit haven't come truePicture: GETTY Load-Date: October 13, 2023  End of Document
