   Viewpoint: Debate over pesticides and bees Slough & South Bucks Express February 9, 2024 Friday  Copyright 2024 Baylis Community Media  All Rights Reserved  Section: CHEMICALS INDUSTRY NEWS Length: 1328 words Byline: James Preston Body   Link to Image Email Viewpoint letters to jamesp@baylismedia.co.uk or write to Viewpoint, Newspaper House, 48 Bell Street, Maidenhead, SL6 1HX. Protecting green space policy is inconsistent In last week's Viewpoint (February 2) Jon Reekie asked why the padel tennis club can lease land at Braywick Park, but the council refuses to extend the same opportunity to Maidenhead United. The leader of the council tells us that his administration has reneged on RBWM's agreement with the club that would see the club move to Braywick Park as he wants to 'protect every inch of green space.' This is the same administration that has put in an application to build 1,500 properties on Maidenhead Golf Course and agreed to build more than 400 properties at Sawyers Close, Windsor (where RBWM transferred green space to a housing association for £0). Many of your readers have called out RBWM over their dodgy decision to refuse to accept Maidenhead United's proposal.  It would have secured the future of the football club and created new sports facilities at Braywick. It would also have provided £460,000 to a council that is supposed to be 'close to bankruptcy'. Serious questions continue to be asked about this dodgy decision and how RBWM can treat two sports club so differently. ED WILSON Bryer Place Windsor Systemic in seed, pollen and the stem Please publish this correction to the letter by Max Lipman (Viewpoint, February 2) I refer everyone to look at en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thiamethoxam This is a Syngenta chemical in the neo-nicotinoid class. See also friendsoftheearth.uk/bees/bees-and-neonicotinoids-problem - from which; "Neonics are systemic pesticides used on plants. "This means they are absorbed into every part of a plant - from the roots and stem, to leaves and flowers. "When a bee feeds on pollen or nectar containing these chemicals, the neonic can damage its nervous system and motor function. "This will affect the bee's feeding, navigation, foraging and reproduction." Mr Lipman infers that as the chemical is only put on the seeds, the bee would have to burrow to be affected. But as is well known, and shown at the links above, the chemical is absorbed by the seed and is systemically present in the plant, including nectar and pollen. ANDREW CORMIE Holyport Road Maidenhead Baffled by argument on pesticide impact My thanks to Max Lipton (Viewpoint, February 2) for his detailed reply to my letter about the effect of toxic pesticides on our bees and the Government's lack of protection for our natural environment. First two simple points. Contrary to Mr Lipton's claim, the pesticide thiamethoxam has been completely banned in the EU since 2018. Secondly almost all scientific opinion favours a ban, regardless of government decisions. I found Mr Lipton's detailed argument baffling. I gave a startling illustration of the extreme toxicity of this pesticide - one teaspoonful can kill 1 ¼ billion bees. This is not of course saying that every teaspoonful used will do this. The permitted dose for sugar beet in East Anglia is, according to Mr Lipton, a teaspoonful for one tenth of a hectare. So, he then says, I am claiming there must be 1 ¼ billion bees (a twelfth of our total bee population) in such a small area, and they will all die. Plainly untrue and of course I made no such claim. Then Mr Lipton points out that treated seed must be buried and will so be inaccessible to bees. But I pointed out specifically that this pesticide is taken up by flowering plants and thereby kills pollinators that visit them. Since the treatment of sugar beet is for plants cultivated for seed, it will be deadly for several years, hence the lengthy ban on further treatment. Mr Lipton ignores the drastic decline in bee numbers and the contribution of pesticides to this, and the adverse effect this has on other crops. He condemns my warnings as a 'political rant', but I make no apology for that at a time when neither of our major parties appears sufficiently concerned at the deterioration in our natural environment to propose the drastic action that is needed to protect our planet. JOHN WILDING East Berkshire Green Party (Slough Branch) About as perfect as an MP's power of recall Good spot by D. R. Cooper (Viewpoint, February 2) The EU classifies the UK as a third country, not a third world country. Third world countries are defined as having high rates of poverty, economic or political instability and high mortality rates. No mention there of water companies pumping raw sewage into rivers and seas, labour shortages especially in the caring profession, midwifery and hospitality due to Brexit, energy bills paid to foreign companies leading to fuel poverty (thanks to one M. Thatcher's privatisation of the energy industry) over 100 education institutions either partially or fully closed due to the failure to deal with RAAC, the Metropolitan Police riddled with racists, a postal system where delivery is a lottery, a plethora of councils about to declare bankruptcy due to the steady erosion of the Revenue Support Grant, billions wasted on HS2 (which has only been continued since construction companies are major donors to the Conservative Party).... all courtesy of the chumps who brought Brexit to Britain. Still, no high rates of poverty (no food banks here, no children going to school unfed or people having to choose between eating or heating) and no political instability (four different Prime Ministers in 7.5 years, the DUP closing down government in Northern Ireland and an astonishing number of political leaders who have no recollection of anything, especially how to find WhatsApp messages, in front of inquiries and then, of course, Michelle Mone, a Conservative peer pocketing £29,000,000 for for recommending a tin pot company called Medpro which supplied the state with unusable PPE); no nothing like that in Brexit Britain... Here everything is tickety-boo. Third world country? Perish the thought. JAMES AIDAN Sutton Road Cookham Measuring the molehill mountain in metres Dr D R Cooper seems to be lacking perspective regarding the subject of molehills (Viewpoint, February 2). It is well known that 4.5 per cent of all molehills appear larger the smaller you become. Whereas Eamonn Holmes is reputed as saying '8 per cent of all molehills on the Northern Ireland border can appear larger - so they can, so they can'. However, he who laughs last, laughs longest, or to put it more clearly 'et qui deridet tandem risum longissimum'. This is particularly true 'dum considerat visum ab improvida visione', or to put it less clearly 'when one considers the view from blinkered vision'. What do you do when you find a molehill in your garden? Do you study it and then call up your friends to come round and commiserate with you? What if the molehill was deposited there by some pesky Eurocrats to punish you for Brexit? Isn't it better to call Alan Titchmarsh? However, if confronted by several molehills, should you ask Theresa May to take time off from judging children's greetings cards and come round to give 'em all a damn good kicking'? In fact, after Brexit there is 91.26 per cent more paperwork involved in importing 71.45 per cent of molehills. This cannot continue. Britain can make its own molehills then reach out and find new export markets for them, such as the USA and Australia. They would have to conform to the Australian points-based system though. Putting the issue into proper context, eventually 86.89 per cent of these molehills will eventually become a mountain - maybe as hard to climb as The Mountains of Mourne themselves. Also, a mathematical formula predicts that if the numbers of letters about Brexit to the Maidenhead Advertiser continue at their current rate of growth, by 2032 all the pages will eventually be filled with letters about Brexit. But at the end of it all, what is going to happen to all those poor moles? Only time will tell. Mr M J STRETTEN (6 O-levels and BA) Riverside Load-Date: June 7, 2024  End of Document
