   WANTED MISSING EU WORKFORCE; Seven years ago the Tories led Scotland into a Brexit referendum that ultimately dragged us, against our will, out of the EU. This week we look at the catastrophic impact on our industries and services. Today, how hard-pressed firms struggle to fill the record number of job vacancies Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 22, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 12,13 Length: 1095 words Byline: ANDREW QUINN Body   THE full extent of Scotland's labour shortage has been laid bare - with more than half of firms in the building trade struggling to find staff. The Daily Record's Broken Brexit series has this week looked at the impact on Scotland of exiting the EU. And the biggest Brexit fail has been the impact on hard-pressed Scottish businesses which were already reeling from Covid lockdowns. Firms across many industries have blamed labour shortages on Brexit and now official figures appear to back up these concerns. Scottish Government estimates from a UK-wide Office of National Statistics survey this month suggest 36.8 per cent of businesses can't find enough workers. Construction was the worst-hit sector, with a 50.1 per cent shortage, followed by accommodation and food services on 44.4 per cent. Many industries from hospitality to farming, were reliant on employees from across the EU. But these workers are often no longer available because free movement of workers ended with Brexit - and the "settled status" system has been branded complex and off-putting for those that want to stay. Crieff Hydro owner Stephen Leckie told how before the first lockdown, the hotel had 1050 staff. Between 20 and 25 per cent of them were from EU countries. The Perthshire venue now has 860 workers and 70 vacancies, which means the business is missing eight per cent of the workforce it needs. The labour shortage has caused Leckie to close restaurants, curb the hours his establishments are open and reduce what services they can offer. He said: "The vacancies are not just in the food and beverage areas but are also in the housekeeping staff, the self-catering teams, reception staff, hair and beauty staff. "Everywhere we look there are vacancies and that restricts the ability of our business to grow. "We've had to shut restaurants, restrict opening hours and restrict menus because we just don't have the staff. "Even with the staff that we do have, we're paying a whole lot more which puts inflation up." Crieff Hydro usually has 220 live-in members of staff. Many returned to their EU home countries during lockdown. But they faced obstacles when it came to returning to Scotland. Leckie said: "What none of us realised is that getting back into the country was going to be nigh-on impossible. There were no working visas. They wanted to come back with us but they simply couldn't." Leckie, who is also president of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said the problem was widespread. He added: "I've not spoken to any company in any part of Britain that says labour's OK. "In Perth, in the last two weeks four businesses in hospitality have closed their doors saying they can't get enough staff to keep running. "Even businesses that are open, some are only open four or five days a week rather than seven days because they can't get the staff." Leckie wants Scotland to be given more powers to deal with the problem. He said: "I would like the Scottish Government to control immigration and release the working visas to make it easy for the good people of Europe to come and work in Scotland." The UK Government has told businesses to fill the vacancies with British workers but Leckie insists that has proved very difficult. He said: "Believe me, we've been trying to get British workers for decades in this industry. "People from the EU want to come here to learn English, they want to live in Scotland for a bit and they want to send money home as they can earn more money here." Strawberry producer Iain Brown runs Easter Grangemuir Farm in Pittenweem, Fife. He has been able to recruit some workers through the UK's seasonal worker scheme but it costs £300 per head. Brown said it is difficult to encourage people to come from Eastern Europe and he is now recruiting from western Asia but that it is more expensive. He said: "It's more expensive to recruit staff than before Brexit and there has been a significant cost added to fresh produce at a time when all costs are going up. "We used to have plenty of labour available from eastern Europe but because of Brexit they no longer come. These workers were very productive and were keen to return each year. "We are now only managing to fill things in short-term but we need a commitment from the Government that there is a long-term plan in place. "With farming fruit there is a long-term investment. We need to make sure we can harvest it and we need to make sure we have the labour to do that." He said increased recruitment costs were forcing prices up, adding: "The free movement of labour made it easier and cheaper to recruit workers. Before Brexit we didn't have to pay an agency. "Now consumers are paying more for their fruit and vegetables. The costs increase and farmers are not compensated." The SNP's EU Accession spokesman Alyn Smith claimed Brexit had "devastated" Scottish companies. He said: "Businesses and consumers in Scotland continue to be hammered by Brexit - and things will only get worse. "Scottish businesses have been devastated by Brexit, with trade barriers and bureaucracy costing us billions of pounds and spiralling the cost of living out of control. That is why getting back into the EU, or at least the single market, gets more urgent by the day to avoid the inevitable additional costs and frictions of Brexit . "It is high time the pro-Brexit parties admit the consequences of their plans for millions of people. "Westminster's decision to drag Scotland out of the world's largest single market against its will has cost us billions of pounds. " Yet despite this obvious connection, both Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer remain committed to 'making Brexit work'. "With access to the single market, rejoining programmes such as Erasmus+ and restoring freedom of movement, an independent Scotland back in the EU will bring about sustained economic growth and prosperity. "At the next general election, we'll put independence at the forefront so Scotland can escape Brexit and Westminster control for good." Scotland Moira's His Keir making TOMORROW Record readers have their say on Brexit and how it's impacted them forefront Brexit good." then SITUATIONS VACANT More than one in three Scottish firms is estimated to be short of workers since Brexit. Here is how many in different industries have been hit WHOLESALE, RETAIL, REPAIR OF VEHICLES MANUFACTURING CONSTRUCTION 29.3% 50.1% 28.1% TRANSPORT AND STORAGE accommodation and food services INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION 35.1% 44.4% 27.1% ALL BUSINESSES 36.8% ARTS, ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION PROFESSIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL ACTIVITIES ADMIN AND SUPPORT SERVICES 25.3% 37.5% 32.7% Graphic    - SCUNNERED Soft fruit farmer Iain Brown and hotelier Stephen Leckie Load-Date: June 22, 2023  End of Document
