   When migration no longer polarizes; Regaining control of the borders: a reason for Brexit for many Britons. Today, few in the UK still consider migration to be a major problem Die Welt (English) February 5, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 Axel Springer SE All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Pg. 5; No. 25 Length: 1023 words Byline: Mandoline Rutkowski Body      London In the year of the European elections, fears of a transnational shift to the right are spreading among progressive parties. Polls recently showed strong growth for right-wing nationalist parties such as the French Rassemblement National (RN), the Freedom Party (PVV) in the Netherlands and the Alternative for Germany (AfD). According to predictions, the "Identity and Democracy" group, to which the AfD also belongs, could become the fourth strongest force in the European Parliament. Its success in many EU countries can also be attributed to dissatisfaction with national and European migration policy. Spokespeople are lashing out at those responsible and insisting on a paradigm shift in border protection. In the UK, Conservative Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has also made a tough migration course the focus of his policy. In the hope of scoring points with the British, who are electing a new government this year. Sunak promised to seal off the route across the English Channel. However, the government's focus is no longer convincing voters. In opinion polls, the Conservatives are 15 to 20 percentage points behind the opposition Labour Party. It is true that the British see illegal immigration as a problem that needs to be solved. A poll in November showed that a narrow majority of Britons support the Rwanda plan. However, other surveys also show that the issue of immigration in general is losing importance in relation to other problems. And they also reveal something else: the British are increasingly open to migration - despite the continuous rise in both illegal immigration and legal immigration. Last year, net migration reached a record high of 672,000 people. What concerns the British far more are social developments that affect them directly. The economy is weakening, inflation and the cost of living are rising, and the NHS health service is a shadow of its former self as a result of years of austerity measures. This worries people: According to a recent YouGov survey, 54 percent rate the state of the economy as the "most important issue ", followed by the health sector (46 percent). The issue of migration (39%) only comes in third place. Robert Ford is a political scientist at the University of Manchester. According to his assessment, the British are currently realizing that a narrative popular among right-wing populists is not working in their country. Their narrative is that migrants are taking jobs, housing and public services away from the native population. A message that has recently caught on in some EU countries. In the UK, this time seems to be over. "The British know that if the government stops the boats, it won't put food on the table," says Ford. In the years before Brexit, things were very different: back then, the UK was faced with a high number of Eastern European migrant workers who had arrived in the country since the EU's eastward expansion in 2004. Migration was the issue in 2015: according to the YouGov survey, it was the number one concern at the time with 71%. This was also due to the fact that Brexit supporters insisted that these immigrants were responsible for many of Britain's problems. The enemy image of the "Polish plumber" was born: a low-skilled foreign worker in the low-wage sector who snatched an easily accessible job from the British and put a strain on public services to boot. Today, public opinion is moving in the opposite direction. The issue of immigration is becoming less important in the public perception, and not just in relation to other aspects. Since the EU referendum, the British also have a much more positive attitude towards immigration. This is shown, for example, by the Europe-wide "European Social Survey" . In 2022, 59% of British respondents said that migration was beneficial for the economy. 58% also thought that immigrants enriched cultural life. In comparison: In 2014, the figures were 24 and 33 percent respectively. Political scientist Ford believes that Brexit itself paved the way for this trend reversal - and cites two reasons. Firstly, Brexit was a response to a core concern of the population at the time: regaining control of the borders. The slogan at the time was: Take back control. "Back then, the British were less concerned about the number of immigrants and more about the fact that the government only had limited control over who came into the country," explains Ford. Many Britons were therefore in favor of the end of European freedom of movement. On this new basis, they were then more open to immigration again. The feeling that their own government could at least largely control who came into the country had taken the pressure off the issue. Secondly, according to Ford, the government had adjusted its immigration policy so that the composition of migrants shifted towards groups that would help the country. "The government has changed the rules so that since then, priority has been given to workers coming to the UK who perform important tasks in society and are urgently needed, such as nurses and doctors." In view of the worsening plight of the NHS, this appreciation has only increased. The Conservatives have therefore delivered exactly what the British had hoped for with their immigration policy, thereby taking the wind out of the sails of anti-immigration populist attitudes. Seen in this light, the post-Brexit migration policy is a "success story ", says Ford. For Rishi Sunak's party, it seems almost paradoxical that it is no longer benefiting from this. A look at the younger generation also shows that the current trend could herald long-term social change. Neither the British governing party nor the Brexit party Reform UK can win over young people with tough migration policies. "They are open to immigration and will become more influential in the future due to demographic change," says Ford. Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word. Original full page PDF Graphic    A group of migrants are brought to Dover by a British Coastguard vessel Load-Date: February 4, 2024  End of Document
