   Whose Brexit was it really?; Letters East Anglian Daily Times August 26, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 26 Length: 299 words Body   WHEN I saw and started to read the latest missive by John Bailey (August 21), I thought - Oh no, here we go once more, yet another letter having a go at Nigel Farage and Brexit. I feel sorry for John as it would appear that he likes nothing better than to bemoan Brexit and Nigel for being very influential in succeeding in getting us the electorate, that all-important and decisive referendum. Nevertheless, I believe John needs to be told to do his homework and get his facts straight if he wishes to pursue his campaign to bash Nigel. Whose Brexit is it? John claims it's Nigel's. Has John not heard of ex-Tory leader Boris Johnson? Is it not factually correct to state that it's BoJo's Brexit (even though 17.4 million of the electorate voted for Brexit)? Whose Brexit battle-bus was it? John claims it was Nigel's. If John is talking about the bus I think he's talking about - the person responsible for that bus has the initials BJ. It was because of the subsequent backlash, that Nigel had to explain it wasn't his battle-bus or slogan on it (which he did not agree with). It seems to me John is actually pointing his angry finger at all of us who voted for Brexit and I'm proud to claim that I am one of the 17,141,241 who voted to leave the EU on June 24 in 2016. I will state once again - BoJo and the Tories have let many of us down as we have not got the true, full Brexit that many of us had desired and campaigned for. So it appears to me to be a case once again of never let the facts get in the way of a Nigel Farage bashing letter. To conclude: With each anti- Nigel letter I am increasingly beginning to think his opponents are increasingly getting concerned about Nigel's possible influence in the next general election or am I wrong? Watch this space! IAN SMITH, Bury St Edmunds. Load-Date: August 26, 2023  End of Document
