   Worth recalling how we got into Brexit mess; LETTER S Get in touch - tell us what you think Email: yoursay@plymouthherald.co.uk The Plymouth Herald January 5, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: LETTERS; Pg. 14 Length: 275 words Body   A RECENT poll by Opinium shows that British voters overwhelmingly feel that Brexit has failed to deliver on the diverse promises made by the Leave campaign in 2016, including controlling immigration, funding the NHS and boosting the economy. Whilst there isn't the slightest chance of Britain rejoining the EU in the next 10 or even 20 years, it's worth thinking how Tory governments got us into this situation. David Cameron started it, by believing he could solve the Tories' internal war over the EU by holding a referendum, arrogantly unaware that angry voters might use the referendum to deliver a judgement on his brutal austerity rather than EU membership. Boris Johnson didn't actually want to leave the EU, but saw support for the Leave campaign as a way to advance his personal ambitions. What of our current Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak? Prior to the referendum, he stated: "I believe that our nation will be more prosperous outside the EU. Outside the EU, we can decide our own immigration policy... and enhance our position as a dynamic, outwardlooking trading economy". Whatever else he is, it's neither stupid nor lazy. I'm certain he'd got his head round the detail of the EU and, despite his public words, knew Brexit couldn't deliver on what was being promised to voters. As a super-rich banker, he saw Brexit as an opportunity for money men to make hay and also avoid new EU rules on tax havens, with little or no thought to the consequences for ordinary folk. We're all victims of this shameful, two-faced behaviour for personal advancement. Brexit is here to stay, but this year we'll have the chance to oust these shysters. Terry Riordan Load-Date: January 5, 2024  End of Document
