   Yotam Ottolenghi blames Brexit and Covid for shorter opening hours thetimes.co.uk November 30, 2023 Thursday 1:45 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 597 words Byline: Tom Saunders Body   Yotam Ottolenghi has changed the opening hours of his seven restaurants due to a shortage of chefs, which was blamed on the effects of Brexit and Covid. Emilio Foa, the chief executive of Ottolenghi’s restaurants, wrote in the company’s accounts for the year ending March 31 that “recruitment of talented chefs in the wake of the UK’s cessation of membership of the European Union and Covid 19 continues to prove challenging and has forced us to change operating hours in some circumstances. “The recruitment and the retention of talented staff is a key priority for the management and the board,” he added. Two Ottolenghi restaurants, Nopi and Rovi, have recently stopped opening for breakfast service though a spokesman for the company said this was unrelated to either Brexit or staffing shortages. The Ottolenghi Spitalfields Deli also ends its service 15 minutes earlier compared with last year, according to its website. Foa told The Times: “In our current financial year, we’ve seen further growth and improvement to our staffing levels and are looking forward to continuing this into 2024. It was decided to change opening hours for a small number of our restaurants post-Covid, and we have found these new trading hours to be successful.” Ottolenghi, the 54-year-old Israeli-born British chef, had previously  warned that his company might suffer labour shortages  because of Brexit, telling The Atlantic in 2019 that there had been “a much slower influx of Europeans coming to work with us”. The restaurateur served as a pastry chef at three London restaurants before founding the first eponymous Ottolenghi delicatessen in Notting Hill in 2002 with the Palestinian chef Sami Tamimi. Since then, Ottolenghi is said to have sold more than 11 million cookbooks and has opened three restaurants and four delis across London. Sales in Ottolenghi’s restaurants and delis rose by £7 million from £21 million to £28 million year-on-year, though pre-tax profits fell from £6 million to just £769,617 as the chain weathered soaring costs. Foa added that while the company had been hit by high levels of inflation, the most material impact on margins had been wage costs. “Most of our sites were able to fill vacancies left by post Covid-19 recruitment and challenges and so staff headcount increased. High inflation put pressure on wages and we have reviewed our pay structure to be even more competitive in the labour market,” Foa added. “With unemployment rates currently very low, we operate in a very competitive labour market, leading to wage cost pressures and a renewed focus on talent acquisition and retention, making Ottolenghi an employer of choice” British restaurants have faced staff shortages in recent years which have been aggravated by Brexit and then the pandemic. A recent survey by UK Hospitality, the trade association, found that about 61 per cent of businesses were suffering staff shortages. Like many others,  Ottolenghi restaurants  have had to weather very high levels of food inflation. Foa said: “Various world events, including the Ukraine war, poor harvests and avian flu led to supply chain issues on some of our key products, but the chefs have always shown creativity in adapting our offering and menus.” Despite the challenges the company noted that its customer base has continued to visit its stores even with a cost of living crisis. “Rising costs of living are reducing disposable incomes which could affect consumer confidence and spending, although based on previous economic downturns, our customer base has been resilient and maintained their spending,” Foa said. Load-Date: November 30, 2023  End of Document
