   According to Goldman Sachs, the U.K. economy is worse off today before Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English February 14, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 370 words Body   The United Kingdom is worse off today than before Brexit. This is the opinion of Goldman Sachs, where they state that the British economy has "significantly underperformed" other advanced economies since the referendum held in 2016. As they detail in an analysis, they calculate that the UK grew 5% less in the last eight years than other comparable countries. Although they believe the real hit could range between 4% and 8% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). UK: why isn't it growing? Goldman Sachs points to three key factors: reduced trade, weaker business investment and labor shortages as a result of lower immigration from the EU. In terms of trade in goods, since the Brexit vote, the UK has underperformed other advanced economies by about 15%. Business investment, meanwhile, has fallen "markedly below" pre-referendum levels. Meanwhile, with respect to immigration, they note that "the post-Brexit shift in flows has reduced labor supply elasticity in the U.K., contributing to the post-Brexit rise in inflation and pointing to more cyclical inflationary and labor market pressures in the future." UK inflation The UK's year-on-year inflation rate stood at 4% last January, in line with the December 2023 price rise, according to data released by the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Thus, the UK inflation rate kicked off 2024 substantially ahead of price rises in other major world economies, after the eurozone started the year at 2.8% and the US at 3.1%. "The largest upward contribution to the monthly change in annual CPI rates came from housing and household services (mainly higher gas and electricity charges), while the largest downward contribution came from furniture and household goods, and food and non-alcoholic beverages," the U.K. statistics office explained. The rise in the cost of living in the UK was mainly driven by a 6.9% increase in food and non-alcoholic beverages, up from 8% in December, while tobacco and alcohol rose by 12.4%, half a percentage point less than in the previous month. Thus, discounting the impact of energy and fresh food, the underlying inflation rate remained unchanged at 5.1%. On a monthly basis, UK inflation decreased by 0.6%, following the 0.4% rise in December 2023. Load-Date: February 15, 2024  End of Document
