   After shock of Donaldson charges, DUP must stand strong to defend power-sharing Irish Independent April 2, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 909 words Byline: JOHN DOWNING Body   t seems a very unlikely casting these days - but in 1976 at Kilkeel High School, in Co Down, Jeffrey Donaldson played that winsome rogue the Artful Dodger in the school musical Oliver!. I The extraordinary circumstances of his resignation as Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) leader and his potential exit from politics are utterly without precedent in the public life of these islands. Despite the impatience to know fuller case details, we must wait out the judicial process revealing the circumstances surrounding historical allegations of sexual offences and also the other charges against his wife, Eleanor. Meanwhile, south of the Border a bout of quiet schadenfreude has been setting in since the weekend upheaval. That's the posh phrase for taking pleasure from others' misfortunes - but perhaps it's better called spite. Such sentiments may be hard to resist for nationalists and other DUP opponents north and south. After all, Donaldson pitched his politics as supporting good moral family values, and he leads a party which has for its 50-plus-year existence projected a strong religious ethos. But this utterly unprecedented case of Donaldson challenges us all to mind our mouths for many good reasons, as the political fallout can affect everyone on this island and the adjacent one. What happens next within the DUP could threaten what most of us hoped was the "final Brexit fudge", which up to last Friday had looked set to bring welcome stability to trade and politics in these islands. A messy leadership battle within the DUP could offer hardliners opportunities to reopen the Brexit issue via a proxy battle. That prospect has rightly left senior politicians in Dublin and London walking on eggshells. Donaldson has long cut an unsympathetic figure to nationalists and moderate unionists. But he was also a long-time gifted communicator, excelling in debating from a young age, and a likeable enough person to play that lead role in the school musical all of 48 years ago. Some critics, and even his supporters, have sometimes said Donaldson has been playing the "artful dodger" throughout his career. But some of the political company he has kept has not helped his image among moderates on both sides of the community. His political apprenticeship was served with the veteran Tory-turned-Ulster Unionist politician Enoch Powell, a man with reactionary views on race relations and women's rights. Powell's infamous 1968 "Rivers of Blood" speech, outlining hardline views on black immigration and racial integration, had sent his British career into decline and he did not stand for re-election in February 1974. But Powell did win election to Westminster as an Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) MP for South Down in October 1974, a seat he kept until his 1987 election defeat. A teenage Jeffrey Donaldson, who comes from South Down and has since 1997 represented it, worked for Powell in the early 1980s. Powell was a political and academic mentor for Donaldson as was the UUP leader, Jim Molyneaux. As a senior Orange Order officer, Donaldson was prominent in the row over the march route to Drumcree Church passing through the nationalist Garvaghy Road in Portadown in the mid-1990s. But by now the 61-year-old Donaldson is the North's longest-serving Westminster MP and he has led the DUP since the summer of 2021, bringing stability to what was a very chaotic organisation. He won belated kudos for selling the Brexit final compromise to the DUP executive and officer board in late January, paving the way for the return of power-sharing after a two-year stalemate. Now his abrupt and calamitous exit rekindles doubt over that Brexit fix and power-sharing stuttering to a start these past two months. It is glaringly obvious that the DUP's interim leader in place, Gavin Robinson, and the Northern Ireland Deputy First Minister, Emma Little-Pengelly, are both allies-cum-proteges of Donaldson, who is now gone. Both are strong supporters of the Brexit deal and power-sharing but their standing among the DUP's power-brokers is so far, at kindest estimate, not proven. Yet these two must now stand strongly and defend the continuation of fragile power-sharing operations. There is also a growing realisation among the DUP principals that what they do next is crucial to the party being able to weather this huge calamity. It was notable that Sammy Wilson, a vocal critic of the Brexit compromise, has said interim leader Gavin Robinson can continue in office until after a Westminster election, likely in the autumn. Ms Little-Pengelly, who is a relative novice in politics, has insisted on stability and moves towards business as usual. Others will take encouragement that, while the DUP is not a happy ship with considerable residual dissent over the Brexit fix, no heavy-hitter has left the party over the issue. There are now signals that the DUP wishes to avoid compounding calamity with open strife and its eyes are on rivals in Alliance and the UUP. Sinn Féin First Minister Michelle O'Neill has reacted with impressive calm, meeting all the Stormont leaders in the wake of the Donaldson departure and stressing the need for cohesion and continuity. All eyes will now be on the build-up to Donaldson's court appearance due for April 24. 'A messy leadership battle within the DUP could offer hardliners opportunities to reopen the Brexit issues via a proxy battle. That prospect has rightly left senior politicians in Dublin and London walking on eggshells' Graphic    Emma Little-Pengelly and former leader of the DUP Jeffrey Donaldson outside Erskine House, in Belfast, in 2022. Photo: PA Load-Date: April 2, 2024  End of Document
