   At your service: Britain relies on key sector to generate exports thetimes.co.uk May 12, 2024 Sunday 11:01 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 942 words Byline: Jack Barnett, Economics Correspondent Highlight: The UK sells insurance, consultancy, banking, financial, marketing, public relations and legal services worldwide, but manufacturing is struggling to keep up Body   One of the first lessons taught to economics students is the difference between goods and services. Typically, textbooks demonstrate this with an example — goods are physical things, such as metals; services are intangibles, like haircuts — but while accurate for goods, these definitions are too simplistic to capture the nuances of various services products. You can’t export a haircut, for instance, but you can sell an insurance contract to someone in another country. Britain sells a lot of insurance contracts, as well as consultancy, banking, financial, marketing, public relations and legal services. These accounted for about £6 in every £10 of Britain’s entire £381 billion of services exports last year, which in turn made up more than half of the near-£700 billion of UK exports.  Indeed, over the past two decades, Britain has become a global services trade powerhouse. According to Emily Fry, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation who specialises in trade, it is “the second biggest exporter of services in the world after the United States. This is a strength that we should leverage, not shy away from, as is too often the fashion in British politics.” Rising services trade is also a reflection of the country’s sophisticated economy. The services industry now generates about 70 per cent of the UK’s entire gross domestic product. Yet the sector’s ascent has come, at least in part, at the expense of the goods industry. According to the Office for National Statistics, since 2010 services exports have increased by 63 per cent in real terms. Goods exports have risen by only 7 per cent over the same period and are down by about 6 per cent since the Brexit vote in 2016.  Greater dependency on services production has left large parts of the country’s former industrial heartlands, mainly in the north, with higher levels of unemployment and poverty, a situation driven by the shrinkage of  the country’s manufacturing base  since the 1980s and it not being entirely replaced with alternative job opportunities. According to Stephen Hunsaker, trade and economics research at the UK in a Changing Europe think tank: “One repercussion of a services-oriented economy is that the jobs and benefits are largely focused in urban centres, like London. Therefore, a more services-based economy will likely exacerbate regional inequalities and not do much for levelling up.” Britain,  like its peers in the G7 group of leading economies , has suffered from a sharp decline in productivity growth since the 2008 financial crisis, generating problems ranging from anaemic wage growth to overly tight tax and spending policy. Some have argued that this slowdown is a consequence of carving out a larger role for the services sector, which tends to exhibit slower productivity growth compared with manufacturing. Economists retort that such a view ignores Britain’s strengths in the production of services that are in high demand worldwide, as well as its decades of accrued worker knowledge and skills that have built a high-value-added, high-income economy. Similarly, it is not a question of either/or. Britain’s present manufacturing base, which contributes about 10 per cent of its GDP, is geared towards technologies that are set to dominate economic activity in future decades, such as renewable energy and medical technology. This complements its services sector. Ana Boata, head of macroeconomic research at Allianz Trade, the international insurer, warns that rebalancing the economy back towards goods production could be “costly in the short run”, with “trading dynamics with Europe post-Brexit posing challenges for the UK to remain an attractive manufacturing and trading hub”.  Fry, meanwhile, believes that “our services strengths are far more diverse than we give ourselves credit for. We are a nation not just of bankers but of accountants, computer game designers, film-makers and world-leading universities.” According to the ONS, financial services exports since 2010 have slipped to £55 billion from £66 billion. Since 2016, the year of the Brexit vote, they have contracted by 19 per cent. “Financial services have not driven the boom,” Hunsaker said. “The sector has seen the least growth and even a decline in exports. What has driven the boom is ‘other business services’, largely legal, accounting, management and PR consulting.”  Despite this production diversity, geographical diversity has not followed. London still generates the lion’s share of services exports. According to a Resolution Foundation report: “In 2016, London exported almost ten times as much services as Britain’s second largest city, Manchester.” The figures it gave were £103 billion for the former and a mere £11 billion for the latter. “Since then our exports have become even more London-centric, with services exports from London growing by 47 per cent between 2016 and 2021 to reach £152.2 billion. Meanwhile, exports from Manchester and Birmingham grew by just 11 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.” So far, warnings that Brexit would railroad the nation’s trade have yet to show in the data. This is largely thanks to exceptionally strong services export growth compensating for a sharp decline in goods exports since 2016 and, to a lesser extent, the pandemic distorting global trade flows. “Brexit has been compared with a slow puncture,” Hunsaker said. “When the UK’s performance is looked at compared with its historical self, it doesn’t appear to be doing terribly, but when compared with its counterparts, such as the G7, it is clear that it is starting to lag behind. Services is the one shining bright spot in an overall gloomier story.” Load-Date: May 12, 2024  End of Document
