   Bad as it may be, the UK has an asylum policy while we have none; They say good fences make good neighbours, but it's really Brexit that now lurks behind all things political David Davin-Power Sunday Independent May 5, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 930 words Byline: David Davin-Power Body   What was she thinking? Justice Minister Helen McEntee is no fool, and when she startled the Oireachtas Justice Committee by blurting out that 80pc of asylum-seekers enter the Republic from the North, she would have felt the ground shifting under her feet. Tánaiste Micheál Martin did his best to deflect the incoming flak, but it was too much of a gift for Rishi Sunak and his ministers to ignore. Desperate, in an election week, for some sign their Rwanda policy was working, they seized on the claim - likely to be broadly accurate, but conspicuously unempirical - as evidence and delivered a few condescending slaps to the Irish Government. The whole pointless row mean- dered on, absorbing valuable political time and energy. There was further embarrassment as Sunak made clear the UK wouldn't be taking back any asylum-seekers and warned the Government here against plans to boost border security that they were never considering in the first place. It fell to Fianna Fáil's James Lawless to at last strike the right note on the BBC's Newsnight, playing down the whole affair in the face of some ill-informed questioning and making light of the Rwanda effect. "I think more journalists have been sent to Rwanda than asylum-seekers," he said. What a mess. Across the Government, the first reaction was dismay at how McEntee's advisers had left her exposed at not one but two committee meetings. Bad enough to flounder in the face of admittedly forensic questioning from Clare TD Michael McNamara at one meeting, but then she dropped the 80pc clanger in www.another.No notes slipped across to her by officials, no words whispered in her ear. Staff in other departments looked at each other and shook their heads. One senior official due before a committee kept his staff on late into the evening, getting a more intensive briefing, lest a similar fate befall him. There is little schadenfreude among ministers on these occasions they all know they could be next. On another level, the reaction in London was a depressing reflection of post-Brexit relations. Any sense of collegiality has long departed. That is not surprising, given the cavalcade of comings and goings in Whitehall in the last five years and the chill in the air that lingers there after our successful negotiating strategy. But perhaps as significant is the withering of relationships between officials, accustomed to rubbing shoulders or raising the odd glass together on the margins of EU meetings. That is largely gone. Who knows now what relationship Department of Justice secretary general Oonagh McPhillips has with her opposite number? First-name speed-dial terms, maybe, but I am entitled to my doubts. It has to be said too that Brexit bafflement has blunted interest here - never keen in the first place - in the workings of the British psyche. It was striking to hear Fianna Fáil's Euro hopeful Lisa Chambers dismissing the significance of the Daily Telegraph: "I wouldn't pay any attention to that rag." There was a touch of the Rees-Mogg disdain about the description of a newspaper with a readership of more than a million and a deep reach into the English heartland, without the Edwardian languor. Brexit lurks behind all things political now. We have had a good war, predictions of economic Armageddon dwindling to millennium bug proportions. But that should not blind us to the new reality that the UK relationship is now business-like and transactional and likely to remain www.so.No point in asking for favours or forbearance, despite all the blandishments from Whitehall. And of course, Rwanda is the offspring of Brexit, regarded with the same incredulity from an Irish perspective as a strange hill to choose to die on. But just for a moment, imagine if the policy works as a deterrent, imagine if the asylum-seekers flocking across the Border are a harbinger of success. That is the straw in the wind that Helen McEntee's "80pc" represented - and that is why it was seized, highlighted and brandished by Sunak and his ministers. And consider this more awkward reality: that, unpalatable though it may be, they have a policy on asylum while we appear to have none (bar a patchwork of court rulings, agreements of dubious value and a pending EU deal, which is sure to be hotly argued). It was good to hear Roderic O'Gorman say the emphasis will be on speedy administration - but surely that was needed from the outset? As asylum-seekers were moved from the Mount Street encampment there came the announcement that the search was on for state buildings that could be converted for their use - presumably including Baggot Street hospital, 500 metres from Mount Street. Only now? Finally, we are told the Cabinet is to discuss a "Covid-style" communications strategy around immigration. Really? Did I not hear Joe O'Brien - the hard-working junior in O'Gorman's own department - complain last month that such a plan "has been floating around the ether for 12 months"? And can it be that the Cabinet's committee on migration met for the first time last week? For all that, there were signs of some welcome urgency. The operation to clear Mount Street was largely humane and efficient, in contrast to the ham-fisted St Patrick's Day initiative. But it has not stemmed the growing number of asylum-seekers now without accommodation, and that must be a worry. Gardaí were resolute in dealing with the Wicklow agitators, with asylum-seekers moved into Trudder House to hammer home the point. But like housing, migration is not going away, and any communications strategy will be deeply problematic - if one ever emerges. Graphic    Justice Minister Helen McEntee must have felt the ground shifting under her feet last week Load-Date: May 5, 2024  End of Document
