   Badenoch: Diverge from EU to make Brexit work Scottish Express January 26, 2024 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 472 words Byline: David Maddox Body   KEMI Badenoch has broken ranks with Rishi Sunak by suggesting that the UK needs to move away from EU rules and regulations to make Brexit worthwhile. The Business and Trade Secretary made it clear in exchanges in the Commons that Brexit "will only work if the UK diverges" from EU rules and regulations. It comes amid reports that the Prime Minister is planning to ensure that new UK rules do not create a border in the Irish Sea with Northern Ireland which is still in the EU Single Market. This would mean that all of the UK would have to shadow or accept EU regulations. The Business Secretary did not deny when challenged that the Government could make concessions on regulation to reduce trade barriers with Northern Ireland. She said she was not a participant to Northern Ireland's "political process" and so could not comment, but also stressed the need to find a "comparative advantage" over the EU in terms of regulation in order to "seize the benefits of Brexit". The Government is seeking to restore the Northern Ireland Assembly, which will require the Democratic Unionist Party to end its boycott on participation - a move likely to require alleviating some of the party's concerns over post-Brexit trading arrangements. Speaking in the Commons, Conservative former cabinet minister Theresa Villiers said: "Is (Ms Badenoch) in a position to deny a report in The Telegraph today that the Government has pledged to introduce a requirement that all future regulatory law change will be screened to ensure that they don't create extra trade barriers in the Irish Sea? "Because that could be a significant impediment in the way of divergence from EU laws." Ms Badenoch responded: "I can't, of course, comment on the Northern Ireland political process which is ongoing, and which I am not a participant to. "However, what I will say is that we retain the ability to diverge.That is clear.And I do agree with her that if we are really to seize the benefits of Brexit we need to find that comparative advantage in our regulations with the EU, otherwise there would be no point." She added: "I was the Business Secretary who made sure there was transparency in what we were doing around EU regulations rather than an invisible bonfire, I was the one who ended jurisdiction of the European Court, and we do have a comprehensive deregulation programme which I am pushing. "I do understand her concerns, I will speak to colleagues across departments and make sure they are raised at the highest level." Ms Badenoch's exchanges in the Commons yesterday have raised further speculation she is auditioning to take over as Conservative leader by building bridges with Brexiteers. One Tory MP said: "Obviously she is thinking about a leadership contest." But another added: "It may take a bit more to convince many of us she is a champion of Brexit." Graphic    Calls... Kemi Badenoch Load-Date: January 26, 2024  End of Document
