   Beware of 'Broken Britain' and snake-oil solutions i-news April 27, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 30 Length: 1192 words Byline: PATRICK COCKBURN Body   Iam wary of people who speak about "broken Britain" because the phrase is an unhealthy symptom of the British obsession with their country's decline. This fixation has made Britain an easy victim for political leaders from Margaret Thatcher to Liz Truss who promote toxic remedies for an apocalyptic version of the country's ills that is hysterical, exaggerated and likely to make a bad situation considerably worse. Self-destructive over-reaction to Britain's faltering status in the world is paradoxically accompanied by a fatalistic under-reaction stemming from a feeling that the game is over, we lost and there is nothing we can do to change the result. Moreover, it is easy to suppose that the crisis is so pervasive and responsibility for it is so widely spread that nobody is really to blame. People in Britain treat with curious relish evidence that the country is in terminal retreat. There is, for instance, a fascination with the so-called Mississippi Question - which revolves around whether or not Britain is today poorer than Mississippi, the most deprived state in the US, judging both by their gross domestic product per head. Analysis reveals that Britain is a little bit better off, though only because prosperous London skews the balance in its favour, according to the Financial Times. I am not arguing that Britain's comparative decline is not real and increasingly visible in the over-stressed NHS, local government, railways, water and sewage, army, navy and diplomatic service. Everywhere from the Post Office to Thames Water there are grisly examples of incompetence and decay. Despite heavy rain in January, for example, a half-empty reservoir in Oxfordshire could not be filled because the floodwaters were polluted by untreated sewage. Gigantic sums are wasted by government without those responsible ever being brought to account. During the pandemic, the Test and Trace programme failed to make "a measurable difference" to the spread of the illness despite spending £23bn, according to the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee. This fascination with Britain's own relative decline might have proved harmless had it not repeatedly fuelled disastrous attempts to change the political and economic direction of the country over the last 40 years. This zig-zag course is justified by gobbets of fake history such as the illusion that the UK was in some sort of pre-revolutionary phase, like France prior to 1789 or Russia in early 1917, during the radical 70s. Nevertheless, such fears were used to explain the necessity for something close to a counter-revolution under Margaret Thatcher which brought about the deindustrialisation, privatisation and deregulation for which we are now paying the price. One aspect of Britain's bid to escape from an exaggerated version of its own decline is the way it has looked to the US as an exemplar which it ought to follow. Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan famously marched their countries to the right hand in hand. Politically this was understandable enough. After the Suez Crisis in 1956, the British state drew the entirely sensible conclusion that it had better stick close to Washington in order to maximise its influence. British governments may have kowtowed excessively to the US, but they were scarcely alone in this. What has been truly damaging to the UK is the belief of its political leaders that what works in a country with such vast resources as the US will likewise work in Britain. A small government may be feasible in the US, but since the early 18th century, Britain has had a powerful, well-administered state. It was the Royal Navy, not British industry, that was the backbone of the empire. British pre-eminence had much more to do with victory in the Napoleonic wars and very little to do with free trade. The Conservative mantra about shrinking the size of the state, cutting taxes and reducing regulations is the precise opposite of what Britain did at the height of its power. The whole idea of Britain as "Singapore-on-Thames" and a "buccaneering" freetrade entrepot was always a fantasy that ignored Britain's traditional strengths. Going down this road simply accelerated the supposed decline it is meant to avert. "Broken Britain" was a phrase first used by David Cameron in 2010 in the run-up to the general election, after which he moved smartly to do some vigorous breaking up of his own. Austerity prepared the ground for Brexit, which departed radically from traditional British practice. As one French journalist remarked caustically at the time: "For three hundred years, British policy has been to keep the United Kingdom united and continental Europe divided: Brexit does the precise opposite in both cases." Brexit itself was never as weird as those who opposed it liked to pretend. Most countries in the world have sought national self-determination, even though it might have been in their immediate economic interest to remain part of some larger entity. The greatest damage inflicted by Brexit was political not economic, because it served as the vehicle for a cadre of British political leaders peddling fake remedies for problems that were largely of their own making. Yet hysterical warnings of a British meltdown have gone far to sap the British self-confidence. Anti-declinists have proved more dangerous than declinists because their antidotes are for the most part snake oil whose failure to work is explained away by conspiracy theories. Boris Johnson boasted that Brexit would boost trade and cause no problems in Northern Ireland. Rishi Sunak claims that deporting a few hundred asylum seekers to Rwanda will stop small boats from crossing the Channel and will somehow resolve the huge surge in legal and illegal immigration. But it is Liz Truss with her Ten Years to Save the West who has taken the rhetoric of national calamity to new depths of absurdity. Her efforts to avert disaster were supposedly sabotaged in 2022 by the "deep state", whose members include everybody from the BBC to President Biden. "Little did I know the establishment was about to use every tool at its disposal to fight back", she says in her claim to victimhood which has strong echoes of Donald Trump. At the height of the rows over Brexit in 2019, the former head of MI6, Sir John Sawyer, said that Britain was having "a nervous breakdown". Its mental balance is still unstable: the Government twists and turns as it departs ever further from reality in its bid to avoid electoral extinction. It claims, quite untruthfully, that the streets of London have been taken over by hate-filled mobs and declares Rwanda a safe place, contrary to the decision of the Supreme Court Libya, Lebanon and Syria are broken countries, but Britain is not. Successive political crises over the last few years have not led to much violence. Toxic prime ministers have come in but they have also been thrown out. An exaggerated perception of decline has done more to damage Britain than decline itself. On the other hand, if the last few years have not broken Britain then it probably will not break at all. Political leaders peddled 'cures' for problems largely of their own making Load-Date: April 27, 2024  End of Document
