   Brexit all mouth and no trousers East Anglian Daily Times February 6, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 30 Length: 428 words Body   In his letter (Letters, January 31), Ian Smith leaves me scratching my head. He claims that, unshackled (from our neighbours), "the possibilities for Britain to build relations with fast growing countries" are endless. Might he be referring to Kemi Banenoch's Asia-Pacific trade deal, the CPTPP? This is the one that has been downgraded recently to deliver a predicted 0.04% growth in UK GDP in 15 years' time. Either way, It's a paltry replacement for the 4% growth we enjoyed while in the EU. But - hey-ho. The naivety of this post- Brexit trade deal is breathtaking, its traps obvious from the outset. An Arab country with an Islamist leadership has seized control of the choke-point of the Red Sea and all of us in the West are penalised as a consequence. Increasing trade with the EU to compensate up to a point is fine but, now, it costs us a lot more. We are now no longer in the Single Market, and it humiliates us. Ian also claims that our opportunities to "spear-head cutting-edge technologies is endless." Might an example of this be our reliance on a French energy provider to build us a dangerous, outdated nuclear monolith that will be up and running far to late to be of any use? Putin will be rubbing his hands in glee - one wellaimed ballistic missile and we all suffer an unimaginably painful death. Here, in East Anglia, we'll be the lucky ones - we won't know what hit us. Others will be less 'fortunate'. Why does Ian not mention our own Rolls-Royce Consortium's all-British proposal to build modern, far safer (so safe that they don't even need to build on a coast, let alone a crumbling one), and in a fraction of the time? Wasn't Brexit supposed to be all about us getting behind cutting-edge British technology? If Kemi Bananoch and Suella Braverman want me to 'get behind their Brexit', then the government might at least lead by example. But it never will - Brexiter rhetoric is hot air, all mouth and no trousers. And as for the wonderful financial benefits that Ian claims, where are the benefits in the real world? Do the EADT letters pages brim with letters from happy farmers, fishermen, industrialists? I don't think www.so.UK infrastructure and social cohesion is now crumbling due to an increasingly weakening economy. If there was any truth in Ian's economic claims, there would surely be at least a glimmer of the optimism, pride and happiness. And what happened to that Brexit Holy Grail - a fantastic trade deal with the US? And the £350m for the NHS? Waiting lists are now the longest ever. Codswallop, isn't it? RICHARD HARE, Woodbridge. Load-Date: February 6, 2024  End of Document
