   Brexit makes reunification vote 'more likely' i-news February 6, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 370 words Byline: Arj Singh Body   Brexit has made a referendum on Irish reunification more probable in the short-term - but could eventually keep Northern Ireland in the UK, experts have said. After the deal to restore power sharing last week, the new First Minister, Sinn Féin's Michelle O'Neill, claimed that a border poll could be held within the next decade. Experts said polls showed that Northern Ireland voters believed a border poll was more likely after the political turmoil unleashed on the region by Brexit. But they said that the UK leaving the European Union had also highlighted the dangers of major constitutional upheaval that had left Northern Ireland in a unique and potentially advantageous economic situation with access to the EU and UK markets. Professor Katy Hayward, of Queen's University Belfast, said Brexit led to a "lack of trust in the British Government" in the region, firstly among predominantly Irish nationalist Remainers as Northern Ireland voted to stay in the EU, but later unionists after Boris Johnson's exit deal created trade barriers between the region and UK mainland. It has led to support for reunificai tion moving up to between 35 and 40 per cent in the polls, which is an increase but still "well under" the 50 per cent that may start serious conversations about a unification referendum being triggered under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement for peace. Sinn Féin won the last Northern Ireland elections for the first time, leading to Ms O'Neill taking the top job in Stormont - the first time that a Sinn Féin politician has held the position of First Minister. Professor Hayward (inset) said that Sinn Féin was drawing support from wider parts of society as people protested against the DUP's handling of Brexit. She added: "We don't see a growing portion of people saying they are nationalists but we do see rising expectation of Irish unification and rising support for it". "Post-Brexit absolutely people are thinking about it much more. The prospect feels more real than it did before the Brexit process and all the damage it's caused. Unionists do have reasons to feel apprehensive." But she warned that those hoping for reunification would need to have a detailed plan for a post-UK Northern Ireland. Load-Date: February 6, 2024  End of Document
