   Brexit killing off British industry, claims French prime minister telegraph.co.uk January 30, 2024 Tuesday 6:12 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2 Length: 782 words Byline: By Henry Samuel in in Paris Highlight: Tata Steel will close its remaining two blast furnaces at UK’s largest steelworks by the end of the year Body   Brexit is killing off British industry, France’s prime minister  claimed in parliament on Tuesday. Gabriel Attal said Britain leaving the EU  was behind the closure of the “last blast furnaces” in Britain. Earlier this month, Tata Steel confirmed that it would close the remaining two blast furnaces  at the UK’s largest steelworks by the end of the year.  The plan will trigger the loss of up to 2,800 jobs at the Port Talbot site in South Wales. France will go the same way and see its industry decline if it gives into the “sirens” of Marine Le Pen’s hard-Right National Rally (RN), Mr Attal added in comments he said would “pain” those who voted Leave in the 2016 referendum. With European Parliament elections looming in June and the RN polling to come a full 10 points ahead of President Emmanuel Macron’s Renew alliance, Mr Attal warned that RN’s desire to flout EU treaties would lead to “Frexit” by stealth. “I say it, those who advocate ending the application of treaties are supporters of a disguised ‘Frexit’ that would weaken France,” the 34-year-old told the National Assembly during his general statement to MPs. “Less Europe means less power for France. I’ll take just one example, and it will hurt some people. Brexit: its supporters promised happy days for the British economy and the British people. “Last week, because of Brexit, the last blast furnaces in Great Britain closed. Steel is no longer produced in the UK. In France, on the contrary, thanks in particular to investment from Europe, industry is coming back.” In comments likely to provoke fury across the Channel in some quarters, Mr Attal said: “Who were the first supporters in France of Brexit? Who named streets in the towns it runs “rue du Brexit”, who openly displayed itself with the leader of the Brexit camp? It’s the National Rally.” In September, Britain overtook France  to become the eighth largest manufacturer in the world, according to analysis published by Make UK, the trade organisation representing British manufacturers. Manufacturing jobs in the UK  paid better than both the services sector and the economy as a whole, the analysis also found. According to Make UK, in 2021 – the latest year for which global comparisons are available – UK manufacturing output was worth $272 billion, compared to $262 billion for France. Both were behind Italy on $314 billion. While Make UK regarded the rise in the export rankings as “encouraging”, it cautioned that this was only the third time since 2002 that the UK had been ranked higher than France and could not be attributed to a post-Brexit bounce or other specific factors. The closure of Tata Steel’s blast furnaces came as a devastating blow to the 4,000-strong workforce at the Port Talbot site , which is expected to bear the brunt of the job losses. Tata employs about 8,000 people across the UK. Under the plans, the company will invest £750 million towards the restructuring and building of a less carbon-intensive, electric arc furnace on the same site, backed by a £500 million Government grant.  Tata’s decision follows a similar move by British Steel, which last year said it would close its two remaining blast furnaces and build two electric arc furnaces. It said they could be operational by late 2025. The closures will leave the UK as the only major economy without the ability to make primary steel from iron ore and coal. Tata will cut roughly 2,500 jobs over the next 18 months, mainly through the closure of the blast furnaces and coke ovens. The company’s UK operations have been losing about £1.5 million a day. Mr Attal, who took over as France’s youngest-ever prime minister and its first gay one three weeks ago, has been embroiled in a nationwide farmers’ protest  that has seen tractors besiege Paris and other major cities. He is involved in a bitter shadow boxing match with Jordan Bardella, the 29-year-old RN party leader who is heading the party’s European election campaign. On Monday, Mr Bardella said French farmers were suffering from “unfair international competition” and “punitive European green regulations” – proof, in his view, that “90 per cent of the problem lies in Brussels”. The hard-Right leader  said he was “not against” the Common Agricultural Policy, whose main recipient is France and whose budget he would like to reduce. For him, “the issue is free trade agreements”, particularly with New Zealand and Mercosur, and above all the EU’s Green Deal, which will be “one of [my] two major campaign issues”, along with the European migration pact. In an interview with The Telegraph  last month, Mr Bardella said he was “ready” to take over Mr Attal’s job as prime minister should Mr Macron call snap elections and lose. Load-Date: January 30, 2024  End of Document
