   Brexit endangered our freedoms and citizens Leicester Mercury January 30, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 406 words Body   "SOON to be Corporal David Goodger" ("Ready to do my bit in the Grandad's Army", Mailbox, January 27) raises the amusing possibility of a pitchforked "Dad's Army" to counter a possible attack from Putin from the east. Various others have talked about the introduction of national service or conscription. He rightly raises the threat of a potential Trump win this year for peace in the world and in Europe in particular. Leading Brexiters and right wingers including Johnson, Rees-Mogg, Truss and Farage have all praised Trump and/or stated a preference for a Republican win. As have the likes of lesser lights such as Jake Berry, newly promoted. It was Cameron who warned Brexit could lead to "World War Three". This was dismissed as "Project Fear" by those that promoted Brexit. Following Russian interference in both the 2016 Referendum and 2019 election (there is a whole file on this in Downing Street - the "Russian Dossier" as yet held back), we ended up leaving the EU and shortly afterwards Putin, having split Europe from one of its main military powers (the UK) marches into Ukraine. We no longer stand alone in Europe. Pitchforks are no longer needed. Europe has progressed and, with the exception of Belarus, now has democracies far advanced to that in the UK. Nato is virtually Europe (plus the US). If we are to be abandoned by Trump then what should be happening is a move towards a European army, drawing on its 500 million citizens. The idea that Britain alone can serve any serious purpose militarily in the world today is for the birds. For a start, we can't even fund our armed forces, largely because the country is www.bankrupt.No, a serious military force is needed, one which represents the mature democracies of the world. One to counter the madness of America, the militarism of Russia and the demagoguery of Asia (China in particular, but increasingly India). And in all this we should never forget the importance of good decision-making and hard work in developing world peace. Brexit not only destroyed our economy and stole our freedoms, it destroyed our place in the world and endangered our citizens. If the Tories, and the proponents of Brexit, Trump and the rest of the ghoulish Right are rightfully booted into touch later this year, there should be a public inquiry or Royal Commission into how we ever allowed these people to gain control of our country and to endanger our lives. Dr Andrew Golland, Leicester Graphic    'LEFT TO ROT': The Ratcliffe Road university accommodation in Knighton which could be 'refitted if there was real political will', says one reader Mags Lewis Load-Date: January 30, 2024  End of Document
