   Brexit is killing UK industry, says French PM The Daily Telegraph (London) January 31, 2024 Wednesday Edition 2, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 560 words Byline: Henry Samuel Body   BREXIT is killing off British industry, France's prime minister claimed in parliament yesterday. Gabriel Attal said Britain leaving the EU was behind the closure of the "last blast furnaces" in Britain. Earlier this month Tata Steel confirmed it would close the remaining two blast furnaces at the UK's largest steelworks by the end of the year. The plan will trigger the loss of up to 2,800 jobs at the Port Talbot site in south Wales. France will go the same way and see its industry decline if it gives into the "sirens" of Marine Le Pen's hard-Right National Rally (RN), Mr Attal admitted he would "pain" those who voted Leave in the 2016 referendum. With European Parliament elections looming in June and the RN polling to come a full 10 points ahead of president Emmanuel Macron's Renew alliance, Mr Attal warned that RN's desire to flout EU treaties would lead to Frexit by stealth. "Those who advocate ending the application of treaties are supporters of a disguised Frexit that would weaken France," Mr Attal, 34, told the National Assembly. "Less Europe means less power for France. I'll take just one example, and it will hurt some people. Brexit: its supporters promised happy days for the British economy and the British people," he said. "Last week, because of Brexit, the last blast furnaces in Great Britain closed. Steel is no longer produced in the UK. We in France, on the contrary, thanks in particular to investment from Europe, industry is coming back," he insisted. "Who were the first supporters in France of Brexit? Who named streets in the towns it runs "rue du Brexit", who openly displayed itself with the leader of the Brexit camp? It's the National Rally," said Mr Attal, in comments likely to provoke fury across the Channel in some quarters. In September, Britain in fact overtook France to become the eighth largest manufacturer in the world, according to analysis by Make UK. Manufacturing jobs in the UK paid better than both the services sector and the economy as a whole, the analysis also found. According to Make UK, in 2021 - the latest year for which global comparisons are available - UK manufacturing output was worth $272billion (£214billion), compared to $262 billion for France. Both were behind Italy on $314 billion. While Make UK regards the rise in the export rankings as "encouraging", it cautioned that this was only the third time since 2002 that the UK had been ranked higher than France and could not be attributed to a post-Brexit bounce or other specific factors. The closure of Tata Steel's blast furnaces came as a devastating blow to the 4,000-strong workforce at the Port Talbot site, which is expected to bear the brunt of the job losses. Tata employs about 8,000 people across the UK. Under the plans, the company will invest £750million towards the restructuring and building of a less carbon-intensive, electric arc furnace on the same site, backed by a £500million Government grant. Tata's decision follows a similar move by British Steel, which last year said it would close its two remaining blast furnaces and build two electric arc furnaces. It said they could be operational by late 2025. The closures will leave the UK as the only major economy without the ability to make primary steel from iron ore and coal. 'Those who advocate ending the application of treaties are supporters of a disguised Frexit' Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
