   Brexit has freed UK to tie up multi-billion global trade deals; KEMI'S INDIA TRADE VISION EXCLUSIVE Scottish Express March 8, 2024 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 550 words Byline: Martyn Brown Body   KEMI Badenoch says Brexit has reignited Britain's standing as a global trading nation and opened up markets "worth hundreds of billions of pounds." Writing exclusively for the Daily Express, the Business and Trade Secretary says millions of people are better off now that the UK is free to trade outside the EU. "We are a truly Global Britain now," she said. "Once mocked as a nation of shopkeepers, we know the value of free trade. And we are staying true to our heritage as a global trading nation that ruled the waves." Agreement Her patriotic rallying cry comes amid hopes the UK could strike a bumper multibillion pound free-trade agreement with India. Talks on a deal - seen as one of the biggest Brexit prizes - are ongoing. The mega tie-up could dramatically boost trade between the UK and India which is currently worth £36billion. Ms Badenoch said being outside the EU makes Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with countries like India easier to achieve. The Cabinet Minister has signed massive trade deals with Australia, New Zealand and Florida in the past 12 months with negotiations with many more countries under way.A gargantuan tieup with Pacific nations in the CPTPP trading bloc is also close to being rubberstamped. "Since Brexit, we've negotiated more free trade agreements than any other independent country in the world," she said. "These deals have slashed the costs of our imports and our exports, while opening up foreign markets worth hundreds of billions of pounds for British firms." Taking a swipe at Brexit naysayers, Ms Badenoch insisted the UK is thriving now that it is free from the shackles of Brussels. "The doom-mongers said possibly make it on our EU," she said. do we couldn't possib own outside the E riva h poin ber crun "They told us we'd soon fall behind our rivals but the exact opposite has happened." She pointed to IMF number crunchers who predict Britain will grow faster than France, Germany, Italy, and Japan over the next four years. Italy n T ceed trad "The UK is succeeding, not in spite of embracing free trade, but because of it," she said. And she warned that a Labour government would try to abandon much of the "progress" that has been made since Brexit. British negotiators have flown out to India this week to hold last-ditch talks on a trade deal. Both Rishi Sunak and Indian President Narendra Modi, who is seeking a third term, are said to be "keen" to seal the deal. "We can sign an agreement before the Indian election. I suspect that is not necessarily going to be the case as I don't want to use any election as a deadline," Ms Badenoch said at Chatham House in London. India, set to become the world's third largest economy, would be the biggest country to strike a free trade agreement (FTA) with the UK since it left the EU's trading system in 2021. Britain hopes the FTA will open up trade in whisky and cars to India as well as services and investment opportunities, while New Delhi wants better access for manufactured goods, services and work visas. Sensitive Boris Johnson and LizTruss also sought to secure a free trade agreement with India, a booming economy of 1.4 billion people. A UK government official said the British delegation was making a "last-gasp attempt to clinch an FTA before the Indian election campaign pauses talks". OPINION: PAGE 12 Graphic    Talks... Narendra Modi has spoken with Rishi SunakPost-EU Britannia waives the rules... Badenoch hopes to seal India pact Load-Date: March 8, 2024  End of Document
