   Brexit follies; Letters East Anglian Daily Times January 23, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 30 Length: 377 words Body   Mark Sharman makes two suggestions (Letters, January 18). The first is that John Dell should be given his own column in the EADT to highlight the many follies of Brexit. This is a truly brilliant idea, well done, Mr Sharman. Mr Sharman's second suggestion is not so inspired: he suggests Mr Dell should move to an EU country. Is this irony, Mr Sharman? Your letter shows a poor grasp of the fallout of Brexit that you clearly voted for, you seem not to understand that Brexit has made it extremely difficult, if not impossible, for UK citizens now to move to EU countries. JILL DALE, Melton. I would like to thank B. Walker for, amongst other things, pointing out a major flaw in Mr Sharman's suggestion that I pack my bags and go and live in the EU. Whilst born and brought up in East Anglia, my home for much of the 1970s and 1980s was in two EU countries. Unfortunately, as B. Walker points out, l now cannot take up Mr Sharman's suggestion and return to those countries. Brexit has decreased my freedom and the freedom of each and every UK citizen. In 2016 the Leave campaign, which he presumably supported, stated that they would end the 'freedom of movement' of EU citizens into the UK. This government acted on that wish. What was not pointed out by Leave was that it was a two-edged sword. It also ended our 'freedom of movement'. Prior to Brexit, anyone within the EU - including UK citizens - could freely live, work and play within any state of the EU. Many of our citizens did so and have settled in countries such as Spain, Italy, Germany, Poland and indeed many other EU states. Unfortunately those of us left behind in the UK have to now adhere to strict immigration restrictions when we visit the EU, must join long queues at border controls and have no right to live, work or play in the EU, or indeed be in the EU for longer than a few months a year. This is not a Brexit benefit, it is one of the many harmful consequences we were warned would impact on us as a people and our country if we did "Leave". And that's exactly what has happened. So, Mr Sharman, if you do still want me to take up your suggestion then I recommend you sign up to the nationwide campaign to "Rejoin" the EU. It's the only way I'll be able to make that move. JOHN DELL, Shotley. Load-Date: January 23, 2024  End of Document
