   Brexit made ex-Labour leader back SNP in poll The Times (London) February 5, 2024 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,2 Length: 565 words Byline: David Leask, Kieran Andrews Body   A former leader of Scottish Labour has admitted voting for the SNP because she was "so mad about Brexit". Kezia Dugdale has previously said that her support for unionism has waned since she was a key voice in the Better Together campaign in the 2014 independence referendum. Now, in a BBC Radio 4 documentary, the former Labour MSP has revealed that she once cast her ballot for her one-time rivals to protest against Britain leaving the European Union. "I voted SNP once in my life and that was in the European Union elections immediately after Brexit, where I was so mad about Brexit, I wanted to register a vote for them. And for that reason alone," Dugdale said. "I felt I could vote for the SNP in that European Union election because that in no way could be construed as a vote for independence. "I felt that that was a safe thing to do. I voted Labour in every election since then; from the council to the Scottish parliament to the general election, I have used a vote for Labour." The European parliament elections of May 2019 were held when the UK was still in the EU but on its way out and just a few weeks before Dugdale resigned from the Scottish parliament. Labour lost both its Scottish European seats, taking just 9.3 per cent of the vote. There has long been speculation that Dugdale, now in academia and married to the SNP education secretary Jenny Gilruth, was flirting with Scottish independence. Dugdale, however, stressed last year that she did not think the big constitutional question was going to be put to the vote any time soon. She signalled that her preferences would depend on the circumstances if and when there was a second referendum. "If you are presented with a binary choice between an independent Scotland in a progressive Europe or Little Boris Brexit Britain, I know where my cards would fall down," she said. "I also know I couldn't argue with the same strength for the Union that I did in 2014 now. That doesn't mean I'm Continued on page 2 continued from page 1 Dugdale: I voted for the SNP ready to vote 'yes' there are big, big questions we need to debate as a country and resolve. So I have moved … We have to keep talking about some of these big issues in the country, but not just purely through that Yes-No lens." Dugdale, 42, who was leader from 2015 to 2017, is no longer involved in party politics but her remarks come as her old party attempts to lure pro-independence Scots away from the SNP. The documentary, called Labour's Scottish Challenge, will be broadcast tonight and reveals that Labour believes 28 Scottish seats are "in play" at the next Westminster election. Anas Sarwar, who is now the party leader, tells the programme: "The tipping point in Scotland is around 35 per cent. If we get around 35 per cent in the polls then we are in competition to beat the SNP. If I said that to anybody two and a bit years ago, they would have thought I was deluded. But I have always believed that's what we can do." A survey in last week's Sunday Times showed Labour edging away from the SNP, with its three-point lead being the party's biggest since the independence referendum. Sarwar's party is on 36 per cent, according to Norstat, just over what he sees as the tipping point. Mhairi Black, the outgoing SNP MP, tells the programme that her party should back Labour in a King's Speech in return for the right to hold a second independence referendum. Load-Date: February 5, 2024  End of Document
