   Brexit; Letters East Anglian Daily Times January 25, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 26 Length: 474 words Body   John Dell and his sympathisers appear to be a little like football fans who complain about the referee when their team did not perform adequately. What's done is done and a rematch is not an option. Just accept it, even though it is not to your satisfaction. ANDREW HURLEY, Stutton. I can't help but agree with John Bailey and Andy Ward; this constant moaning can be irritating. But, he should get used to it - it was the constant moaning by those wishing to leave the EU that has got us into this state. Almost from the day we joined the EU, MPs and others started to moan and wanted to leave. So, there are a good few years to go before there is a good balance of moans from each side. Incidentally, I don't want to stir things up, but... I just have this impression that we have had more adverse weather events since Brexit - floods, strong winds and so on. JOHN PREVETT, Woodbridge. I am saddened at regular demands that writers stay silent, who care enough or have time to take an interest in continuing effects of Brexit, because "we live in a democracy", as reasoned by Andy Ward (Letters, January 22). If public opinion on a single day is fixed in perpetuity on "what the majority wants", and gets, we are in danger of creating a totalitarian, authoritarian state. The 'diatribe', as Andy Ward impolitely calls it, of public debate is essential when outcomes are undesirable, promises proved unattainable, the old die and the young come of age. As Carol Vorderman, a recognised maths genius with an IQ approaching that of Stephen Hawking's, said: "'Brexit will boost your business', 'Brexit will do away with red tape' - guess what? None of it was true. Tories telling whoppers to gain power to fleece the population." The numbers seduced by Boris Johnson's man-of-the-people act didn't take seriously the smaller voices warning of Johnson's previous form on lies and being sacked twice for them. The unwary population were not protected from, for example, Cambridge Analytica, and other extremely powerful influencers. Gerhard Schnyder writes in the Byline Times (now in your WH Smith back shelf): "Real workingclass people - with all their variety of ideas, values and convictions - need to be encouraged to participate more in the political debate..." This government are ditching rules we had to protect the rights of the people, recently raising the threshold on general election campaign funding and allowing donations to be undisclosed. I understand the Conservatives have double the campaign funding of Labour, Peter Geoghegan reports in the January Byline Times. We need to be aware of the think tanks behind their methods and smooth salesmen they can employ. We're getting to a stage where we will be fighting for our democracy if ordinary people like our own amazing John Dell, don't take an interest in the detail. AUDREY NAYLOR, Ipswich. Load-Date: January 25, 2024  End of Document
