   Brexit supporters to back Sunak's Northern Ireland trade plan i-news February 1, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 654 words Byline: Arj Singh ; Richard Vaughan Body   Leading Brexiteers are set to back the Brexit deal on Northern Ireland, in a major boost for Rishi Sunak. The former cabinet minister Sir Jacob Rees-Mogg told i that the deal "looks OK", while a Conservative Party source claimed that Sir Bill Cash was set to back the agreement with the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) in Commons votes today. Sir Jacob was among Leavers who expressed concerns about a so-called screening mechanism for all new UK laws. This will require ministers to make a statement if they create new trade barriers with Northern Ireland by diverging from EU rules that are followed there under terms set after Brexit. But despite ministers confirming the mechanism in a command paper yesterday, last night the Government expected the deal to pass with little trouble as no MP raised major objections in public or private. Sir Jacob said new laws to enact the deal "will go through without a division", while another source said they could go through "on the nod", without any opposition. Several other Brexiteers were, however, keeping quiet, suggesting that the Prime Minister was not fully out of the woods. Dame Priti Patel raised concerns in the Commons about what the deal would mean for the UK's "freedom" to act. She told MPs: "We do know that Northern Ireland's economic lifeblood is linked to the rest of Great Britain. It is vital to ensure that the ability to diverge and have the freedom to secure Northern Ireland's economic lifeblood and also the prosperity of Northern Ireland remains." Boris Johnson, who spearheaded the Brexit campaign, warned against a return to Theresa May's "Chequers plan". This would have led to the UK aligning on goods rules with Northern Ireland, and therefore with the EU, to avoid checks on trade between it and the mainland across the Irish Sea. "We must retain the appetite and the courage to diverge from the lowgrowth, high-regulation European model," the former prime minister said. "We must at all costs avoid a return to anything remotely like the disastrous Chequers formula, whereby artificial concerns about the border between Northern Ireland and Ireland are used to keep the whole of the UK in alignment with EU rules." However, the backing of key figures is a major boost for the current Prime Minister. Mr Sunak said the deal offers a "brighter future" for Northern Ireland after two years of political deadlock. It is now hoped that the DUP will end its boycott of power sharing at the Stormont Assembly within a matter of days. The DUP leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, hailed the deal for removing routine post-Brexit checks on goods shipped from Great Britain to final destinations in Northern Ireland. It is an effective scrapping of the Irish Sea border that triggered the party's boycott, replacing the so-called "green lane" for trade with a new "UK internal market system". "There should not be a border within the UK internal market," he said. "These proposals remove that border." But the agreement has sparked splits in the DUP. Sammy Wilson, the party's MP for East Antrim, said that Northern Ireland would still have to "adhere to and implement laws which are made in Brussels, which they had no say over and no ability to amend, and no ability to stop". Mr Wilson added: "This is a result of this spineless, weak-kneed, Brexitbetraying Government refusing to take on the EU and its interference in Northern Ireland." However, reports last night suggested that the MP could still back the deal in a vote. Under the plan, the post-Brexit red lane for transporting goods from Great Britain to Northern Ireland and on into the EU single market will remain. But the command paper offers measures aimed at reducing the volume of trade required to use that red-tape heavy route, with a prediction that 80 per cent of goods will now move free of routine checks. It is understood that the EU has been kept up to date with the shape of the Government's measures. Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
