   Brexit; Letters East Anglian Daily Times January 31, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 20 Length: 1116 words Body   Here's something for my fellow Brexiteer, Mark Sharman, to contemplate after all the criticism that he's been receiving in these columns for having the audacity to stick his head above the parapet. "With the polls pointing to a Labour landslide at the next election, Sir Keir Starmer has been practising the argument he will use to forge closer ties with the EU: That Brexit has been an economic flop. Yet, as a report by the influential Centre for Economics and Business Research shows. Britain is in fact prospering compared to our continental neighbours. Not only will we remain Europe's second largest economy by 2038, but we'll have also narrowed the gap on Germany. France, by contrast, will fall further behind - hobbled by even higher taxes than here, a sclerotic public sector and crippling strikes. Unshackled from the bloc, the possibilities for Britain to build strong relations with fast-growing countries and spearhead cuttingedge technologies are endless. And with lower taxes and interest rate cuts on the cards, our prospects are even brighter. Could there be a more eloquent rebuttal of Sir Keir's argument for crawling back towards the doomed European European project in the hope of eventually rejoining?" The above was part of the editorial comment in a national newspaper. IAN SMITH, Bury St Edmunds. Mr Sharman asks so many questions and uses such language, I wonder if he has access to the internet or if he largely sources his views at his local bar or the billionaire owned tabloids? Those he refers to as "Remoaners" are largely now "Rejoiners". "People's Vote" marches I have joined were peaceful apart from a minority of National Front-style agitators who turned up in opposition. These protests populated by academics and thinkers were so so far from wanting to "overthrow" democracy as Mr Sharman seems to believe, that I hardly know how to enlighten him. But I'll give it a try. The referendum involved a single question that hadn't covered the detail nor the outcome and types of "deal" possible. Nor was it able to be challenged in the courts in its procedural failings as it only had "advisory" status in law. In the light of that, many want a better, confirmatory second vote. Leaving the EU had been presented as a gain regarding immigration and the NHS and, like frogs being gradually boiled in a pot, people were only slowly learning of all the misinformation and losses involved and the dangers of being governed by a newly libertarian wing of politics promoted by wealthy speculators like Nigel Farage. Even now this government are planning the Media Bill, which is going to erode safeguards about what goes to print, "diluting" recommendations made following Lord Leveson in the phone hacking scandal. Chuka Umunna, the Liberal Democrat who took part in the People's Vote campaign, questioned Boris Johnson's "do or die" strategy, saying in 2018: "In our democracy, it is vital that the people get their say on Brexit, rather than their elected representatives in parliament being reduced to some rubberstamp for whatever plan Boris Johnson, Jacob Rees-Mogg and Michael Gove have been putting together behind closed doors." Democracy is in danger in the UK, but not because of any wish to keep abreast of what the people want or for a press free from favour. In fact, let's have a general election in May. There are petitions for that. AUDREY NAYLOR, Ipswich. An awful lot of your letter writers seem to bang on about us living in a democracy, particularly in relation to the Brexit referendum. I'd like to challenge that view. I have voted in every general election since I was old enough to do so, way back in the mists of time, and not one candidate I have voted for has been elected. And I believe the current government was only elected by thirty some percent of the vote. Is that democratic? Today's politicians are hardly representative of their constituents, being mostly, it seems to me, lawyers and PR people who appear to spend their time practising arguments to keep themselves in power rather than governing the country. If we are serious about being a democracy we must ditch firstpast-the-post elections and introduce some form of proportional representation. It would surely provide some degree of continuity and even stability and hopefully concentrate minds on sorting out the many problems we have rather than how to win the next election. Politicians are wont to say the public are not stupid then proceed to treat us as if we are. We need politicians who have the courage to tell it how it is. They need to explain clearly that good reliable public services can only be provided if paid for, and taxation related to income is the fairest way to do so. If you don't want to pay tax, fine, but you won't get the service unless you are rich enough to pay for it yourself - and as far as health and education for example are concerned, I guess that is most of us. S. HARDIE, Woodbridge. Mark Sharman's letter of January 18 beggars belief. He asks why people like me - 'remoaners' he calls us - don't pack up and and go and live in an EU country. Well, nothing would give me greater pressure. However, there is a snag. Surely, Mr Sharman can't be so obtuse that he's unable to realise that its precisely because of people like him that this option is now no longer open to us, at least not without a massive amount of bureaucracy; and that would be for just one of the 27 countries. Nothing would have given me more pleasure than to have continued keeping my boat in the Mediterranean and north Biscay - as indeed I did for in excess of 15 wonderful years. In Mr Sharman's defence - and those who still share his views - I will concede that he was let down badly and misguided by a bunch of populists, thinly disguised as politicians. With cheap-Jack two- and three-word slogans these people fed so many of us on a diatribe of lies, all of which are now shown to be so. Many of these populists have already bailed out of politics, no longer capable of justifying their betrayal of the very people whose best interests they were charged by parliament to represent. Mr Sharman has a right to have expected better of them. We all did. We now have no option but to clear up their mess. If we care for our children's and grandchildren's future prosperity then sticking heads in the sand - ignoring the car-crash - will get us nowhere. RICHARD HARE, Woodbridge. How many other readers? I know many are fed up in reading the continual bickering about Brexit. We live in a democratic country. This subject was voted on and it seems some people are continually bickering about it. Enough is enough. Find something else to write in about. JANET DOUGLAS, Framlingham. Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
