   Brexit border checks could cause chaos, warns Khan The Independent - Daily Edition February 10, 2024 Saturday Second Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Print Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 615 words Byline: ARCHIE MITCHELL POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT Body   Sadiq Khan has warned new Brexit border checks will lead to chaos for Eurostar travellers at St Pancras station without urgent action from ministers. The mayor of London said planning for a new EU border system has been inadequate and will lead to huge queues at peak times or services being cut. "This is directly a result of Brexit, and it is not an issue ministers can now wash their hands of," he added. The European Union is planning to introduce an "entry/exit system" (EES) that will record the movements of non-EU visitors. The EES is an automated IT system for registering citizens from "third countries", which means everywhere outside the EU and Schengen area. It will register the date and place of entry and exit, plus fingerprints and a facial biometric. EU member states have expressed concern at the extra time the process will take, with Slovenia saying it takes up to four times longer. And this week HS1, the owner and operator of the line and stations between London and the Channel Tunnel, said preparations for the new system have been "severely inadequate" and warned of delays and caps on services when it is introduced. Giving evidence to parliament's European scrutiny committee, HS1 said the checks could take an extra two minutes per passenger. Just two EES kiosks have been allocated to St Pancras by the French government, despite expectations that as many as 50 willbe needed at peak times. There were 18.6 million travellers on the Eurostar last year, up by more than a fifth on the previous 12 months and back at pre-Covid levels. Mr Khan said London is "roaring back" from the pandemic, and the checks, due to be implemented in October, risk derailing the capital's "golden quarter". Without urgent action, they threaten to drive away tourists and undermine the recovery in London's retail, hospitality, events and leisure businesses, he said. Lobby group BusinessLDN backed Mr Khan's calls, calling on ministers to "urgently find a solution that prevents these new checks causing lengthy delays in the run-up to Christmas". And Bernard Donoghue, director of the Association of Leading Visitor Attractions (Alva), said Brexit delays "further undermine the UK's reputation as an attractive, accessible destination". Mr Khan said: "The success of the Eurostar is a vital part of London's and the UK's economic success - with St Pancras a gateway for huge numbers of tourists and businesspeople in the country. As it stands these new post-Brexit checks will cause chaos at St Pancras, with cuts to services and potentially huge queues facing passengers at peak times. This is directly a result of Brexit, and it's not an issue ministers can now wash their hands of. "With London's economy roaring back after the pandemic, this sends a terrible signal to both tourists and businesses from around the world. Ministers now need to offer HS1 and Eurostar all the support it needs to resolve these issues as a matter of urgency. Cuts to services and longer delays simply isn't an option." BusinessLDN chief executive, John Dickie, said: "London's status as a global city depends on its ability to provide seamless international connectivity. We should be rolling out the red carpet for overseas visitors to the UK, rather than making them wait or be turned away at the front door due to a combination of red tape and inadequate resourcing." And Mr Donoghue added: "The anticipated delays, and the significant delays at ports we have already seen since Brexit, further undermine the UK's reputation as an attractive, accessible destination. We are all working hard to recover overseas tourism back to pre-pandemic levels and these bureaucratic obstacles thwart these ambitions." Load-Date: February 9, 2024  End of Document
