   Business counts cost of Brexit on EU trade; Red tape Outlay averages £100,000 in three years, says survey, as new border checks start Financial Times (London, England) January 30, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 505 words Byline: EMMA AGYEMANG ; PETER FOSTER Body   British businesses have experienced a stark increase in the complexity and cost of trading with the EU since the UK left the bloc, spending an average of nearly £100,000 navigating the post- Brexit customs border over the past three years, new data has revealed. A survey of 1,001 senior decision makers working in UK-based businesses that trade overseas found that 81 per cent believed they faced more complexity today than they did before Brexit. Three-quarters reported their sales to the EU had fallen or become more complicated as a result of bureaucratic barriers, including tariffs and regulatory compliance obligations, that were erected by the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement. A similar proportion said their business was "less profitable as a result of Brexit", a view shared by 70 per cent of those who voted to leave the bloc and 79 per cent of those who wanted to remain. For those saying Brexit had "harmed" their operations, the mean cumulative cost since 2020 was £96,281. The findings come as the UK government tomorrow begins to phase in new Brexit border checks on imports of most plant and animal products from the EU. The British Chambers of Commerce warned yesterday that many firms remained "in the dark" about crucial aspects of the new border, which will require the use of Export Health Certificates and include physical inspections at ports from the end of April. William Bain, the director of trade policy at the BCC, said the border risked adding to business cost pressures. "There is a real fear these extra costs will end up being passed on to the UK importer and their customers, putting upward pressure on inflation," he said. Meanwhile more than three-quarters of the survey respondents agreed with the statement "the UK has not experienced the trade boom that the promoters of Brexit promised" - including 73 per cent of leavers and 84 per cent of remainers. Alex Baulf, vice-president of global indirect tax at Avalara, a tax technology firm that commissioned the survey conducted by Censuswide, said he was a "little surprised" at the high total average cost companies had suffered. But he said the overall picture of business being hurt by the new cross-border compliance and trade red tape was not surprising. "There is a customs border now, businesses are finding ways to navigate that, but it implies a compliance burden with more red www.tape.UK businesses have had less trade with the EU and that's impacting [their] revenue. Where there is trade, there's additional cost, which is eating into margins." The findings chime with recent surveys by the BCC and Make UK, the manufacturers' organisation, which indicated that businesses were seeing very little improvement in trade with the EU three years after Brexit. The Avalara survey found 82 per cent of British businesses would support efforts by the government to improve European www.trade.UK officials acknowledged that Brexit had created challenges for business, but added they were working with industry and the EU to reduce the frictions. Load-Date: January 29, 2024  End of Document
