   Conservative ordeal in the United Kingdom CE Noticias Financieras English May 4, 2024 Saturday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 962 words Body   The story of the British local elections is that of Boris and Dorian. Boris, because the former Prime Minister forgot to go to vote with an ID card (a rule he had imposed), just as he had forgotten that parties were forbidden during the pandemic (something he had decided). And Dorian because, like Oscar Wilde's character in order to stay eternally beautiful and young, the Conservatives made a pact with the devil (the Brexit) in order to stay in power. But in one case as in the other, things have not turned out well. The count will be finalized today, but it is already clear that the Tories are going to lose almost half of the councillors they had, in addition to the seat for Blackpool South in the House of Commons (Brexiteer territory par excellence), in another fateful night for their cause, and in another installment of the serialized novel of their decline, decline and eventual fall after fourteen consecutive years in power. Amidst the wreckage, the only lifeline was the re-election of Conservative Mayor Ben Houchen for the Tees Valley region (northeast England), a locally popular figure, but whose majority still suffered a dent. That Pyrrhic victory could be enough (especially if fellow Tory Andy Street is re-elected in the West Midlands) for Rishi Sunak to avoid a confidence motion, save his skin until the general election and the world avoids the embarrassing spectacle of a new change of British leader not coming out of the ballot box. The Conservatives are aging badly, like the portrait that Dorian Gray hid in a room in his Victorian London home, and over which the years passed inexorably as he, young and beautiful, went on a spree, committing all sorts of excesses, causing the downfall of friends, breaking hearts and even committing murder. In the case of the current British government, the list of charges can be summarized in the general decline of the country at all levels, the fall of the economy (Poles will be richer in five years), the increase in poverty and crime, the deterioration of health, education and public services, the destruction of the welfare state, austerity, indebtedness, migratory chaos, the loss of prestige and international influence.... And quite a lot of this -although not all- is attributable to Brexit, the Faustian pact of the conservatives to remain in power for a few more years, at whatever price. Which is proving to be very high. The only black mark for Labour - and a warning - is the loss of support in the Muslim community. Most voters realize that Brexit is not the promised manna, that they have been manipulated, that immigration has gone up instead of down, and that, to the question of whether they live better or worse now than in 2010 (when Cameron came to Downing Street) or even on February 1, 2020 (when Brexit came into effect), the answer is a flat-out no. That is why the electorate has decided to torture the Conservatives before giving them the lace, execute them by hanging, shoot them, take them to the electric chair or give them the lethal injection. Which will come. Every election, whether to fill a vacant seat in the Commons, appoint mayors or councillors, is one more mockery on the way to the gallows. One day it is to tear out their fingernails, another to slap their faces, gouge out their eyes, burn them with cigarettes or put a funnel and force water into their mouths. Their instinct is to survive (Sunak wants to exhaust the legislature and avoid elections before autumn if possible), but the application of the death penalty will even be a relief. Yesterday's results were faithful to polls that give Labour a lead of about twenty points, and confirm the trend towards a clear victory for him in the general elections, with an absolute majority. The only negative note for the center-left opposition was the loss of control of town halls in university towns and communities with a large percentage of Muslim population, due to support for Israel. But that black mark was more than offset by the massive recovery of votes in their former strongholds in the post-industrial north (the red wall) that Johnson took away from them by cajoling voters with Brexit. The electorate no longer listens to the Tories, whether they sing a Michael Jackson hit, a bolero with the voice of Julio Iglesias, a Beatles song or a Euro-visionary Abba tune. Their slogans ("Stop the boat people", "Take back control", "Save the NHS", "Lower taxes", "Reduce immigration"...) are interpreted as merely figurative. They sing alone in karaoke, without an audience, whether it is when Sunak announces an increase in the defense budget to 2.5% of GDP, or the detention of immigrants to send them to Rwanda, or the lowering of inflation, or the reform of the welfare state to make it harder to go on sick leave (one in ten Britons is) and collect disability benefits (at an annual cost of 85 billion euros). Alea jacta est , as Julius Caesar said. The die is cast, or so it seems. The Tories lose almost half of their councillors and several mayoralties in another harsh punishment from the electorate. From the Conservative point of view, the movie is Nightmare on Elm Street (or in this case, Downing Street), the book Chronicle of a Death Foretold, and the adjectives for yesterday's results range from dismal to catastrophic. As for Labour, it touches almost power, but offering hardly anything, for fear that anything it says might be taken by the voters against it. In the end Dorian Gray destroyed his portrait, and in doing so killed himself, while the face of a beautiful young man reappeared in the painting. The British Tories are on their way to the hell of opposition, where they hope to regain beauty. Cruelty comes from weakness, said Seneca, and the electorate feels weak and cruel. Load-Date: May 5, 2024  End of Document
