   Conservatives up for a mighty fall at the White Cliffs i-news June 7, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 2053 words Byline: Patrick Cockburn Body   People in Dover complain that, however bad things get in the rest of the UK, they are always that bit worse in their town. They respond with sour amusement to Dover being portrayed in the media as the direst example of some UK-wide political or economic failing. "I tell people that I am from Dover and then leave it up to them to make some joke about the place," says retired railwayman and longtime resident Mike Sargent. For instance, many British towns and cities have their traffic problems, but few can be as bad as in Dover, where, on one day in May, vehicles queued for five hours to get on the cross-Channel ferries, leading to gridlock throughout the town. This congestion is even gaining an international reputation. "My grandparents, who live in France, get worried and ring me up to ask if I am OK," says Nicolas Deshayes, an artist living in a house below the great 12th-century castle of Henry II that towers over Dover. Although it is a small town with a population of 40,000, Dover has repeatedly provided extreme examples of UK problems far more serious than stationary traffic. Inequality has risen in Britain in the past 40 years, but in Dover it takes a physical form in the stark contrast between a rich and ultramodern port and a poor and largely moribund town. The two are only 100 yards apart, divided by the A20 dual carriageway, down which stream 10,000 lorries a day. Dover is Europe's busiest ferry port, handling £144bn, or 33 per cent, of the UK's trade in goods, carried by a fleet of ferries. They manoeuvre skilfully in and out of the harbour on their way to and from Calais on the other side of the Channel. If this complex operation slows or stops for a few hours, it disrupts national supply lines. In 2018, the Tory Brexit minister, Dominic Raab, was derided for admitting that he "hadn't quite understood" how reliant the UK is on the Dover-Calais crossing, but it is doubtful if many of his critics were aware of it themselves. "A lot of money flows through Dover, but little of it stays here," says Sargent. Closed shops and charity shops are frequent in the town centre. More than a third (35 per cent) of children in Dover live in poverty, according to research by Loughborough University for the End Child Poverty Coalition. Dover is a caricature of the downside of de-industrialisation, the switch to cheaper labour abroad and the marginalisation of provincial towns by the state. All these are features of globalisation, hostility to which, and to immigration in particular, has sparked populist revolt across the Western world. A LEADING ISSUE For many in Dover, the threat of foreign migrants, whether they come in fragile little boats or fly in legally, is a fixation. In practice, most of those in the boats are picked up by Border Force or RNLI lifeboats before they reach the Kent beaches. Immigration is a leading issue in the general election on 4 July, but in few places more so than in Dover. Anxiety is genuine, even if its causes are exaggerated. Deshayes says that his neighbours warned him to keep his door locked, in case wandering asylum seekers might break in. As for immigrants taking local jobs, Ian Burn, an academic recently arrived from London, scoffs at the idea, citing a posting by an immigrant from South America, which read: "I have come to steal your jobs - if you have any." In reality, the only signs in Dover of small boat arrivals are brightlycoloured life jackets discarded in a skip close by a reception centre in the Western Docks. Immigration has nevertheless shaped politics in Dover over the past decade. In the Brexit referendum of 2016, Dover voted 62:38 in favour of leaving the European Union. "The Leave vote was sold on one subject and one subject only, which was immigration," a Dover resident, who wished to remain anonymous, told me in 2019. A leftwing activist, Eric Segal, said then that if Brexit were reversed, he believed that in Dover there "would be blood in the streets". Brexit and immigration together fuelled the Conservative landslide in Dover in 2019, as in the rest of the country. "Small boats were a huge part of making Dover Conservative," according to the defeated Labour candidate, Charlotte Cornell. "People believe Rishi Sunak's Rwanda policy is a phoney, but feelings about immigration are less intense than before." PATRIOTIC FERVOUR During this general election campaign, Labour is keen not to be outdone when it comes to patriotic fervour. The Labour candidate for the Dover and Deal constituency, Mike Tapp, a former Army officer, writes that "from the flag to the White Cliffs, Labour must embrace the symbols of Britain". He argues that the bid by the "far-right fringes" to monopolise iconic national symbols must be challenged and reversed. the "farright does indeed believe that Dover is not only a symbol of British sovereignty, but a place where anti-immigrant rhetoric is likely to find a receptive audience. Unsurprisingly, Nigel Farage, now the leader of Reform UK, chose to launch the ultra-nationalist party's general election campaign in the yacht club on Dover's seafront. Pressing the usual anti-immigrant buttons, he described the wet and frightened refugees crossing the Channel as "an invasion", hinting that they included dangerous Islamists radicalised by the Gaza war, who are carrying out a "slow motion D-Day in reverse". Asked if he intended to destroy the Conservatives, Farage replied that there was no need for this because "they have destroyed themselves". His claim about self-inflicted Conservative collapse in the country as a whole is debatable, but in Dover this appears to have already happened - and in a spectacular fashion. The prospect of Conservative disintegration nationally has become conventional wisdom, but it is the imbroglio revolving around Charlie and Natalie Elphicke, successively the MPs for Dover, which provides the most bizarre, headline-grabbing example of the process in action. THE ELPHICKE MELODRAMA Charlie Elphicke, a barrister, became the Tory MP for Dover in 2010, but in 2018 he was accused of sexual assault and later sentenced to two years in prison. Replaced as MP in 2019 by his then-wife Natalie, she rapidly established a trackrecord for rabid right-wing rhetoric, especially about immigrants. Then, in an astonishing turnaround in May, she changed sides, joined Labour in the House of Commons and denounced the Government as "a byword for incompetence and division". Labour left-wingers in Dover are enraged by the speed with which she was welcomed into their party's ranks at a time when veterans on the left were being ejected. Just how much impact the Elphicke melodrama will have on voters will only become clear on election night, but Cornell says that "voters have learned they cannot even trust the Conservatives to stay Conservative". The actual outcome of the poll in Dover is unlikely to be changed by defection, before which pollsters predicted that she had a 92 per cent chance of losing her seat. Natalie Elphicke (inset) had already created outrage among many Dover voters because of what they saw as her ambivalence two years earlier when a big chunk of Dover's labour force lost their jobs. On 17 March 2022, P&O Ferries suddenly sacked, without consultation, 786 workers on its ferries, a move that the company admitted was against the law. Most of those fired came from Dover and the east Kent coast. "I never want to live through another day like that again in my life," says a veteran seaman sacked at that time, who does not want his name published. "Young women starting a family burst into tears when told they were jobless." The workers were replaced by non-UK agency crews earning wages as low as £4.87 an hour. "Everybody in Dover was disgusted because they had all worked on the ferries at some point in their lives," says Sargent. The old workforce had lived and spent their money in the town, but their low-cost replacements, who might be from Uruguay, India or Indonesia, were visible only when they trundled their suitcases through Dover on their way to the railway station and their flights home. Natalie Elphicke was accused of supporting a ""ire and rehire" approach by the ferry companies, yet she tried to join a demonstration shouting "shame on you", believing the chant to be directed against P&O - before she was told that it was directed at herself. P&O SACKING SCARS RUN DEEP Ironically, it is the arrival of the small boats and the increased friction to trade stemming from Brexit that has helped some former P&O crews to find new jobs. "People in Dover rallied round us in solidarity," says the veteran seaman. "Small businesses like the shops, cafés and pubs were offering jobs." " He himself, along with many others, joined the Border Force, which needed experienced seamen tofind and rescue people in inflatable dinghies out in the Channel. But he adds: "The scars from the P&O sackings run deep and have not disappeared. People in Dover still talk about it all the time. Their mental health has suffered." " This mood of defeat and dfiance impressed Ian Burn when he moved to Dover. "There is a dark humour here," he says, with supporters of the local football team, when they lose a match as they almost invariably do, chanting at the opposing team: "You think you are good, but we lose every week." He believes that people in Dover have low expectations of life in general, but also a determination to stick it out regardless. Defeatism is frequent in Britain, especially outside London and prosperous metropolitan centres. But the sense of defeat feels starker in Dover because one is surrounded by symbols of past British victories, inaccessible though these monuments often are. THE GATEWAY TO ENGLAND I found that the best view of the town, port and their surroundings is from an abandoned gun platform halfway up the Western Heights, reached by walking down a path from a nearby car park. Opposite the viewpoint, on the far side of a narrow valley at the bottom of which is the town of Dover, rises Henry II's castle. On the seaward side of it are the White Cliffs, inside which are the tunnels dug deep into the chalk that once housed the headquarters for the Dunkirk evacuation of 1940. Dover is overburdened by its history as "the gateway to England". In the ill-frequented but excellent museum in the centre of town, is a skilfully-constructed wooden boat that 3,500 years ago traded up and down the Channel. On top of the Western Heights is a Napoleonic-era brick fortress or citadel with a deep moat that has since served as a borstal and an immigrant removal centre. Currently there are plans to turn it into a high-tech hub, although when I visited it, my way was barred by a man who said: "You can't come in because we are filming a Bollywood movie." It is easy to portray Dover as yet one more sad casualty of de-industrialisation, outsourcing of labour, and under-resourced local government. Once it had a large paper factory, which closed in 2000, and has since been converted into luxury flats. Until 2006, a battalion of the Parachute Regiment was based in a barracks on the outskirts of the town. Since the P&O sackings of 2022, Border Force has probably become the largest employer. FINEST ROMAN REMAINS The recent history of Dover may appear to be one of inexorable decline, but it is also one of missed opportunities. The town should profit far more from the cruise ships berthing in the port that carry great numbers of tourists, few of whom see anything in this ancient town aside from the castle and the White Cliffs. "Dover has some of the FINEST ROMAN REMAINS in Britain," says Philip Hutton, an architectural historian, but a painted Roman house, perhaps the best example of its kind in the country, has been largely closed to the public since it was discovered in 1970. Overall, however, efforts to preserve the town and publicise its attractions are fragmentary and episodic. In the run-up to the general election, politicians will be beating the patriotic drum hard in Dover, but it is telling what little effort they have made hitherto to preserve its heroic past or guarantee its people a decent future. I never want to live through another day like that in my life. Young women… burst into tears The only signs in Dover of small boat arrivals are brightly-coloured life jackets discarded in a skip Load-Date: June 7, 2024  End of Document
