   Court confirms what we all knew: amnesty is an affront to justice; Ironically, government's own Brexit arrangements led to ruling Belfast Telegraph March 4, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 18 Length: 901 words Byline: Allison Morris Body   I T was an emotional day in the Royal Courts of Justice in Belfast last week as victims gathered to hear a judge rule in a challenge against the government's legacy legislation. The pain and emotion could be seen on the face of Martina Dillon, who lost her husband Seamus in an LVF attack outside the Glengannon Hotel near Dungannon two days after Christmas in 1997. Mr Justice Colton agreed with the argument the amnesty element of the Troubles, Legacy and Reconciliation Act 2023 was not compliant with European human rights legislation. But while this was a partial victory for those who seek to have justice for their loved ones, it does not change the rest of the legislation that brings an end to civil cases, inquests and Police Ombudsman investigations. Mrs Dillon was granted an inquest that is currently paused due to a legal issue surrounding the use of a Public Interest Immunity (PII) certificate. It is unlikely to be resolved ahead of the May 1 deadline when the Act will bring all inquests to an end. So while it was a moral victory in terms of the amnesty, the ruling will not help those families who campaigned for an inquest - the very least a person can expect when they've lost a loved one to violence. For those families, the justice campaign continues. Later in the week we also learned from the Public Prosecution Service there will be no charges from the Operation Kenova investigation. The death last year of the person named only as the 'source' in PPS documents - IRA enforcer turned military intelligence agent Freddie Scappaticci - put an end to any hope of justice for his victims. Scappaticci, aka Stakeknife, got to die an old man. Unlike his victims, who died violently, accused of being informers by the security services' most valuable asset. The families of Eamon Fox and Gary Convie also had their hopes of justice dashed, as Mr Justice O'Hara delivered a not guilty verdict in the trial of the UVF man accused of murdering their loved ones. James Smyth had a previous conviction for the murder of Cormac McDermott in 1994, just months before the sectarian killing of the two workmen. As the judge pointed out, he is a man who did not walk free from court without a stain on his character. He was, Mr Justice O'Hara noted, "happy to murder Catholics just for being Catholics". The dignified manner in which the Fox and Convie families have held themselves stands in stark contrast to the masked entourage of loyalist thugs Smyth travelled with throughout the trial process. The case was the last so-called supergrass trial that we are ever likely to see. It is a deeply flawed system that has not delivered even a remote resemblance of justice, failing on every outing. Amid a very busy week that highlighted the flaws in our legacy system, one important legal point may have got lost in those very real stories of misery and grief. There, among the legalese of Mr Justice Colton's 200-page judgment on the government's controversial Legacy Act, was a very important point - one of rights protection specific to citizens here, unavailable to those in England, Scotland and Wales. And it comes from the unexpected quarter of the post-Brexit arrangements. Counsel for the victims' families had argued that the provisions in the Windsor Framework take primacy over the Legacy Act. Therefore, Northern Ireland's unique arrangements, negotiated by the very government who wished to introduce an amnesty here against the wishes of the vast majority, turned out to be what prevented it implementing that aspect of the controversial law. The ruling is heavy and cumbersome, but the abbreviated version is that the 2019 Withdrawal Agreement, which came into force on February 1, 2020, now known as the Windsor Framework, declares that we are entitled to the same provisions in law as those citizens of EU member states. And the UK must "disapply inconsistent or incompatible domestic provisions, through domestic primary legislation". The ruling states: "The provisions in the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 relating to immunity from prosecution… are incompatible with article 2 of the Ireland/Northern Ireland Protocol/ Windsor Framework. Pursuant to section 7A of the EU (Withdrawal) Act 2018 article 2 of the Ireland/Northern Ireland Protocol/Windsor Framework has primacy over these provisions thereby rendering them of no force and effect. These provisions should therefore be disapplied." This shows the Brexit arrangements do not just apply to trade, as was claimed, but that our rights are universal for all citizens living on the island of Ireland. This ruling shows that by virtue of the Withdrawal Agreement/Windsor Framework, when it comes to our rights as European citizens, we are protected North and South, and for that I am grateful. Those victims, regardless of whether their loss was at the hands of loyalists, republicans or state forces, can thank the Brexit arrangements for protecting them from an amnesty that was an affront to justice. Brexit has brought few benefits economically, but the fact that our island status has at least stopped rights being eroded from people living on this side of the border is to be applauded. It may not please the hardliners, who would sacrifice human rights standards just so Northern Ireland was not a place apart, but it is certainly reassuring that one of the highest judges in the land recognised our unique status. Graphic    Martina Dillon Load-Date: March 4, 2024  End of Document
