   Deal may thwart post-Brexit freedom to break from EU rules: Boris Belfast Telegraph February 1, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 469 words Byline: Adam Forrest Body   BORIS Johnson has attacked Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal with the DUP, warning that it could tie the UK to EU rules on the trade of goods in future. The Government has set out its agreement with the party to remove routine checks on goods moving from Britain to Northern Ireland in a bid to restore power-sharing at Stormont. The so-called "green lane" process - which requires percentages of goods to be checked in NI as they arrive from GB - will be rebranded as the UK internal market system. But Mr Johnson, and some leading Tory rebels, have claimed that the deal could thwart Britain's post-Brexit "freedom" to diverge from EU rules. The former PM called on the Government to have the "courage" to ditch more Brussels regulations. "We must retain the appetite and the courage to diverge from the low-growth high-regulation European model," said Mr Johnson on X. "We must at all costs avoid a return to anything remotely like the disastrous 'Chequers' formula, whereby artificial concerns about the border between Northern Ireland and Ireland are used to keep the whole of the UK in alignment with EU rules." Mr Johnson's former Brexit negotiator Lord David Frost said he agreed. The Tory peer warned the deal should not "slow" the push to diverge from the EU. Under the agreement set out in the command paper, the post-Brexit "red lane" for transporting goods from GB to NI and on into the EU single market in the Republic will remain. But routine checks will be removed from "green lane" on goods from the GB destine to stay in NI and replaced with checks on when "smuggling and disease risks" are suspected. The Government predicts that 80% of goods will now move free of routine checks and has pledged to amend domestic law - specifically a section of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act - to affirm the fact that new EU laws will not automatically apply in Northern Ireland, and must first be subject to democratic oversight by Stormont. In respect of further UK divergence from EU standards, there is also a legal requirement that new Westminster legislation is assessed as to whether it "impacts on trade between Northern Ireland and Great Britain". Former Home Secretary Priti Patel and former Business Secretary Sir Jacob Rees-Mogg challenged Northern Ireland secretary Chris Heaton-Harris to explain how the UK would be able to diverge on EU rules without risking arrangements for Northern Ireland. Mr Heaton-Harris insisted that the deal did not "change the freedoms and powers we have secured through Brexit". He added: "It will not reduce our ability to diverge, nor our commitment to do so, should it be in the interest of the UK." But Theresa Villiers - a former Northern Ireland secretary - also said that she was "troubled" by the deal and the prospect of it being rushed through parliament. © The Independent Graphic    Boris Load-Date: February 1, 2024  End of Document
