   Dismay as workers told post-Brexit lorry park is set to close The Western Mail March 16, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 15 Length: 496 words Byline: OWEN HUGHES Body   WORKERS at the Welsh Government's post-Brexit lorry park have been told it is closing. The government created the park to meet demand for additional checks at Holyhead after Brexit and after the loss of another truck site. It has proved a much-needed facility, particularly as the previous Road King site was closed when HMRC took on their site for a £45m customs post. Welsh Government are now building a separate border post for sanitary and "phytosanitary" checks on plant and animal products, all part of the additional red tape after the UK left the EU. That post is being built on Plot 9 where the current Welsh Government lorry park is based. Under the revised plans a smaller lorry park was due to be retained on part of the plot. But this month contractors working on the site were told the lorry park will shut at the end of March. There are concerns over the impact, with fears about lorries clogging up lay-bys and other roadside places in and around the port town. Welsh Government said it was "considering a range of options". Security firm Corvus told staff about the planned closure. It is understood 16 contracted staff were affected, although they have been offered alternative roles at other sites where they provide security. One staff member said: "I'm concerned about the aftermath of this action and the loss of employment for the staff. An explanation would be appreciated and what is the ongoing solution to the ongoing off-road parking. Surely closing this site is not a solution but an advancement into chaos. "Noise pollution in the town of Holyhead, traffic disruption, missed boarding, a community full of disgruntled people. Offroad parking should be paramount in the build-up to Holyhead freeport." They said currently the 60-bay site was often at capacity and sometimes had to turn people away. Member of the Senedd for Ynys Mon, Rhun ap Iorwerth, said: "The reported closure of Welsh Government's post-Brexit lorry park at the end of the month is deeply troubling. A facility of this kind is a vital part of Holyhead port's infrastructure. I campaigned for such a facility when first elected 10 years ago, because of the disruption caused by a large number of lorries parking on Holyhead's streets. "The opening of the RoadKing truck stop resolved the issue, but post-Brexit, that was lost, in order to develop a new border facility. Once again we had to call for new facilities, and I was pleased that Welsh Government were able to provide parking space on their Parc Cybi site. Now I fear we'll be back to square one again, with lorries seeking parking alternatives around the town. "I've written to the Minister for Economy asking for further information on why this decision has been made and what alternative plans are currently being considered to mitigate these potentially damaging impacts." A Welsh Government spokesperson said: "We are considering a range of options for Parc Cybi and will provide an update once those discussions have concluded." Graphic    >>The lorry park in Holyhead Load-Date: March 18, 2024  End of Document
