   Don't be fooled by the Blob, Brexit is already paying dividends; Controlling our own trade policy means we are able to negotiate the right deals for Britain The Sunday Telegraph (London) February 4, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 18 Length: 638 words Byline: PETER LILLEY Body   The clue, as Sherlock Holmes taught us, is "the dog that didn't bark in the night". This week was the fourth anniversary of "getting Brexit done" when the UK nally left the EU. Yet from the Government came not a bark, scarcely a growl - except from the Business and Trade Secretary, Kemi Badenoch, who published an excellent 24-page summary of the fruits of Brexit. The rest of the government machine was mysteriously silent. The consequence of that silence is that the narrative about Brexit is being written by its opponents. Holmes deduced that the dog didn't bark because the thief was so familiar that it failed to challenge him. Many in the Government have failed to challenge the familiar narrative that membership of the EU single market was so benecial to our trade that its loss cannot be o set by trade elsewhere or the ability to make our own laws less burdensome. I must plead guilty to having helped establish this myth. As trade and industry secretary responsible for implementing the single market programme in the early 1990s I made bullish speeches about how it would boost our exports. At the same time I helped negotiate the Uruguay Round - which halved taris worldwide and set up the World Trade Organisation - and made slightly less bullish speeches about that. Over the ensuing quarter of a century our goods exports to the EU stagnated - growing less than 1 per cent a year. By contrast, our goods exports to the 100 or so countries with whom we had no trade deal grew by nearly 90 per cent. Given how little membership of the single market benetted our exports, it should be no surprise that leaving it has not perceptibly impacted our trade. Since we left, UK goods exports to the EU have actually done slightly better than our exports to the rest of the world. What lessons can we draw? We should not exaggerate the importance of trade deals. What really drives trade is businesses producing goods and services others want, alongside a competitive exchange rate. Yet business lobbies agonise about customs checks adding 1 per cent to their costs but endured without a murmur an exchange rate the IMF said was 10 per cent overvalued. The second lesson is that the most valuable trade deals for the UK are those with fast-growing markets, which reduce previously high barriers, and which cover services. So Kemi and the Prime Minister are right to hail the Pacic trade pact of which we will be the only non-Pacic member and the potential Indian trade deal. Services, which are particularly important for the UK - accounting for half the value added of our exports - rarely featured in trade deals negotiated by the EU. So now our priority must be to upgrade our deals to incorporate more opportunities for service companies. The third lesson is that the greatest Brexit dividend is the ability to make our own laws. We can streamline regulations to reduce compliance costs and promote competition. For example, simplifying the Working Time Directive won't bring back the 60-hour week, but it will simplify annual leave and holiday pay calculations and recordkeeping. £1billion of administrative savings are planned across business. In the 1980s we saw that the cumulative eect of individually modest deregulatory measures is huge - moving Britain from being the slowest-growing major economy in the EU to the fastest. At last we can apply deregulation to inherited EU law. Although these measures cannot yet have had much impact, the UK economy has been doing better, or less badly, than its competitors, So the Brexit eect - pace the BBC - cannot be negative. The IMF even forecasts Britain will grow faster between now and 2028 than Germany, France, Italy and Japan. It's time to bark back at those trying to steal the Brexit narrative. Lord Lilley served as trade and industry secretary from July 1990 to April 1992 Load-Date: February 4, 2024  End of Document
