   Don't put too much weight on recession, says Bailey; Bank of England Governor points to signs of upturn as Goldman claims Brexit shrunk Britain's economy The Daily Telegraph (London) February 13, 2024 Tuesday Edition 2, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; TEASERS; Pg. 17 Length: 688 words Byline: Tim Wallace Body   ANDREW BAILEY has cautioned against putting "too much weight" on Britain entering recession ahead of data expected to show the economy has contracted for two quarters in a row. The Governor of the Bank of England said he was not overly concerned about a downturn as he argued that it was likely to be shallow and short-lived. Analysts expect official data on Thursday to show the economy shrank by 0.1pc in the final quarter of 2023. It would mark the second consecutive contraction, meaning the UK has fallen into a recession for the first time since the start of the pandemic. Confirmation of a protracted economic slump will fom a challenging backdrop for Rishi Sunak and the Tories in the Wellingborough and Kingswood by-elections. Voters go to the polls on the same day the GDP data is published. However, Mr Bailey said that whether or not the country tipped into a formal recession last year was less important than the future path for the economy. He told students at Loughborough University: "I wouldn't put too much weight on that. If we do get two successive negative quarters - and we don't know - it will be very shallow. "What I would put more weight on is that the indicators we have seen since then have shown some signs of upturn. There is still a long way to go but we are beginning to see signs of an upturn." Mr Bailey added: "In the forecasts we published two weeks ago we have a somewhat stronger projection for growth ... so I would put more weight on that frankly than where we ended up last year." His comments came as analysts at Goldman Sachs claimed Britain's economy was 5pc smaller than it would have been without Brexit while leaving the EU had also made inflation worse. Economists James Moberly and Sven Jari Stehn at the US investment bank argued that Britain was suffering "a significant long-run output cost of Brexit" in a note sent to investors. Trade, migration and business investment have all taken a hit since the 2016 EU referendum in ways which have held back GDP growth, they argued. The analysts wrote: "The UK economy has notably underperformed other advanced economies since the EU referendum www....UK real GDP per capita has barely risen above pre-Covid levels and now stands 4pc above the mid-2016 level. This compares with 8pc for the eurozone and 15pc for the US." The economists said comparison to a model of a "Doppelganger" Britain that had remained in the EU suggested the economy is now 5pc smaller than it otherwise would have been. Goldman Sachs said the cost of living had also jumped by 31pc in the UK since the vote to leave the EU. This is worse than the 27pc increase in the US and the 24pc rise in the eurozone. Mr Moberly and Mr Jari Stehn acknowledged "significant uncertainty" over their estimates, putting the potential range of the hit to GDP at between 4pc and 8pc. However, the pair also noted that in some areas, such as trade in services, the economy has performed better than expected. Other economists said Goldman had exaggerated the impact of leaving the EU and ignored other changes since the referendum, such as rising interest rates, Covid and the energy crisis. Prof Jonathan Portes of King's College London, a senior fellow at the think tank UK in a Changing Europe, said the true impact of Brexit was more likely in the region of 2-3pc of GDP. The Institute of Economics Affairs argued inflation was worse in Britain because the Bank of England over-stimulated the economy with low interest rates, not because of Brexit. Goldman Sachs's Brexit forecasts have in the past proved misguided. At the time of the referendum, it predicted the UK would fall into a recession if it left the EU, which did not happen. A Treasury spokesman said: "The UK has grown faster than Germany since leaving the EU and the IMF has said our medium-term growth outlook is brighter than many of our neighbours ... including France and Germany. "The Government is making the most of Brexit freedoms to grow the economy, including repealing financial services law, [that was] inherited from the EU, so that we can unlock reforms with the potential for £100bn in investment over 10 years." Load-Date: February 13, 2024  End of Document
