   Doubts raised over demand for pint-sized bottles of wine ahead of September launch mirror.co.uk May 2, 2024 Thursday 12:36 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: MONEY; Version:2 Length: 484 words Byline: By, Richard Wheeler, PA Parliamentary Editor & Lawrence Matheson Highlight: Last December, the Government confirmed the introduction of the 568ml size, which will join the 200ml and 500ml options already in circulation Body   Pint-sized wine bottles are set to hit UK shelves from September, as announced by a business minister, despite scepticism about consumer demand. Kevin Hollinrake revealed that seven changes to pre-packaged wine sizes will take effect on September 19, claiming they will bolster the "thriving" UK wine industry with new opportunities for "innovation and greater choice". However, SNP's Patrick Grady questioned the Government's enthusiasm, suggesting there is "little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit". The Glasgow North MP challenged the Government to "admit that its Brexit dream of people quaffing pints of wine" was merely a "fantasy", highlighting the harsher reality of "In fact the reality is a Brexit nightmare of border checks, of reduced consumer choice and of business closures."  In response, Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch dismissed the concerns: "I can't imagine why anyone would be complaining about the sale of pints of wine." She added, "If he doesn't like it, he doesn't have to buy it." Last December, the Government confirmed the introduction of the 568ml size, which will join the 200ml and 500ml options already in circulation. Historically, pint bottles of Champagne were available in the UK before it entered the European Common Market, remaining on sale until 1973, but production stopped due to non-compliance with EU weights and measures regulations. Mr Hollinrake informed the Commons: "The 568ml pint quantity is one of several changes in pre-packed wine sizes that are expected to come into force on September 19 2024, supporting the thriving UK wine sector by providing opportunities for innovation and greater choice." Mr Grady challenged Mr Hollinrake's response as being "nowhere near as definitive" as the Government's December press release, which boldly announced: "Pints of wine stocked on Britain's shelves for the first time ever." Mr Grady pressed further: "Not will be stocked, not might be stocked, not could be stocked, not to be stocked it implied that pints of wine were and are available to buy right now in shops across the UK." "Will the Government admit that the reality is there's been little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit and in fact it's entirely possible pints of wine will never be stocked on UK shelves ". In response, Mr Hollinrake quipped: "Well it's never difficult to distinguish the right honourable gentleman from a ray of sunshine, is it ". He continued to defend the industry's performance: "Our wine industry is thriving. Over 900 vineyards across Great Britain, the UK wine industry produced 12.2 million bottles of wine in 2022 and our new post-Brexit powers provide new options, including new legislation which aligns existing sizes across still and sparkling pre-packed wine so that both can be sold in 200ml and 500ml quantities, which we know there is good demand for." Load-Date: May 3, 2024  End of Document
