   Eateries warn of price hikes as new Brexit rules come into force Watford Observer February 1, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 374 words Byline: Gabriel Roberts Body   New Brexit regulations could mean price hikes for customers and businesses, local eateries linked to the EU have warned. As of January 31, all fresh animal and plant products imported from the EU require additional veterinary paperwork, although the health certificates will not be checked at the border until April. Vito Ricciardi, 58, who owns the La Bottega Italiana deli in Market Street, said the checks would mean further price increases. -The challenge is for small businesses, I can-t hold these price increases so I have to pass them on," he told the Watford Observer. -I don-t know where the prices are going to go, and when customers think it-s unreasonable to pay, they will stop buying it.- He added that his family has owned the business since 1976, and that Brexit - particularly the required labelling process - had disrupted the supply chain and led to products "vanishing" from his shelves. The government has delayed the introduction of the border checks on fresh EU food five times since the post-Brexit trade deal came into force in January 2021, but it is now going ahead. Don't blame it on Covid or Brexit, blame it on the good times Brexit issues could mean pigs in blankets are off the menu for Christmas Toni Budo, 46, who owns Toni-s Greek Souvlaki and Coffee Bar in Watford Indoor Market, also said prices may need to increase. He said: -80 per cent of my food comes from Greece so it-s a problem for both customers and businesses. I have to buy from Greece so it-s authentic.- He opened the stalls, which he runs with his wife, son and daughter, as his first business two years ago, but he added: -I-m working more hours now and I don-t know what will happen for my business.- L'artista's owner Franco Malanga said all prices for stock from Italy are increasing, but they are "trying to keep the restaurant prices the same and keep a positive attitude and see what happens". "We may need to make some changes such as deals on bulk supply to get around it," he added. However, Galiano Bar Restaurant in Vicarage Road was among several who said they were unaware of the incoming changes, while Meriden Fish Bar, Ocean Bells Coffee, and G Gibson Butchers said they would be unaffected because their products are not sourced from the EU. Load-Date: February 1, 2024  End of Document
