   EU ready to 'bolster post-Brexit ties with a Labour government' i-news February 23, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 796 words Byline: Hugo Gye Body   The European Union is set to offer Labour a reset of post-Brexit relations if Sir Keir Starmer wins the next general election, i has been told. European leaders are targeting a scheduled 2026 review of the existing UK-EU trade deal as an opportunity to agree a closer trading relationship, which would also boost economic security if Donald Trump returns as US president. The deal would not involve Britain rejoining the single market or customs union, which the Labour leader has already ruled out, but would be intended to help businesses import and export goods - including food and cars - which are being hampered by new trade rules since Brexit. The Trade and Co-operation Agreement, signed by Boris Johnson in 2020, will be reviewed in two years. Brussels officials have publicly insisted that the review will only be a technical process to ensure the existing agreement is working properly. But privately, representatives of individual member states and the EU's central institutions have told Labour they are open to a more ambitious negotiation. This could include joint regulations on issues such as safety standards for car manufacturers, health checks on food and plant products and crossborder trading of financial services. Many businesses would welcome this move but it could risk accusations from Brexiteers that Britain is outsourcing laws to Brussels. One senior European diplomat said: "The 2026 review? is a big opportunity for Starmer, potentially. "If they decide to leave it to the bureaucracy, it will be very technical. But if there is political will to make real changes to the relationship then that will be extremely significant. "It all depends on the political momentum of a new government." Another EU source said: "The potential future government of this country is looking at ways through which it can get closer rather than further away from Europe - especially in a geopolitical context that will most likely change a lot internationally if Trump? will be in the White House. "If, as [shadow Chancellor] Rachel Reeves says, growth is the answer to the economic malaise of the UK, to grow you need better trade relations with the EU. "It is half of [the UK's] trade, so it is the easy way to improve the economic situation significantly." The source suggested that Britain and the EU could strike a deal on financial services as well as the imports of live animals, but warned: "I don't think we're there yet, there are a lots of ifs and buts." In September Sir Keir said he would seek closer ties with Europe, but ruled out reversing Brexit. The shadow Cabinet Office minister, Nick Thomas-Symonds, said: "We would aim to improve the UK's trade and investment relationship with Europe, including trying to negotiate a veterinary agreement to help tackle food inflation. "With war in Europe and increasing threats, Labour would seek to strike UK-EU defence and security pact to complement Nato and strengthen European security, as well as better co-ordination of policing to smash criminal people smuggling gangs. "This would be within the Labour Party's clear red lines, of no return to the customs union, the single market or freedom of movement." Trade with Europe How the arrangements work Britain's relations with the European Union since Brexit are governed by the Trade and Co-operation Agreement, which was agreed between Boris Johnson's Government and the European Commission on Christmas Eve 2020, and came into effect six days later. The core of the deal is a trade agreement which ensured that there would be no tariffs or maximum quotas on goods passing between the UK and the EU. It also contains provisions on a range of other issues including fishing, data sharing and travel - introducing rules which allow tourists to travel to the continent with ease, but make it much harder to settle there than it was before Brexit. Some classes of goods face major regulatory restrictions under the terms of the deal. Raw unfrozen meat, for example, cannot be transported into the EU and it is now extremely difficult to send live plants to the continent. And despite the lack of tariffs or quotas, businesses have complained about the need to fill out customs declarations and other paperwork when they export to the EU. It is also harder for some professionals to work in EU countries because their British qualifications are not automatically recognised. Economists believe that leaving the EU has made the UK's gross domestic product grow more slowly than it would have done, but it is hard to discern the precise effect because of the impact of Covid and the global inflation crisis that followed. Hugo Gye A senior Labour insider said: "The main thing that businesses are asking for is stability and continuity, and a government that won't try to pick fights." Load-Date: February 23, 2024  End of Document
