   Former Labour MEP made president of Scottish group aiming to reverse Brexit The National (Scotland) January 17, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 336 words Byline: Judith Duffy Body   A SCOTTISH pro-EU group has announced the appointment of a new president to succeed former SNP minister Michael Russell. David Martin, who was the longest serving UK Member of the European Parliament until Brexit, has now taken on the position at the European Movement in Scotland (EMiS). The former Scottish Labour MEP takes over from Russell, who stepped down from the honorary role ahead of being appointed chairman of the Scottish Land Commission. EMiS, a non-party political pressure group campaigning for a return to EU membership, recently hosted a series of events in Scotland featuring a giant star symbolising the UK-s "lost place in the EU". READ MORE: Campaigners continuing the fight to get back into the EU after Brexit The Our Star project was founded by two pro-EU campaigners with the aim of promoting European values, with an emphasis on peace and unity. Other activities have included holding a workshop which invited speakers from across the culture, hospitality and tourism to discuss how the lives of professionals within their industries has been made more difficult by Brexit. Martin, who was a member of a Scottish Government advisory group on Scotland-s relationship with Europe following Brexit and also the youngest MEP to lead the Labour group in Europe, said: -The European Movement in Scotland has kept the light on for Scotland-s place in Europe. -It brings great energy, knowledge and enthusiasm to its campaigning. -I am proud to succeed to the presidency of such a dynamic organisation.- READ MORE: Brexit causes 'problems' in rewilding Highlands, Trees for Life says EMiS chair David Clarke said: -We are delighted that David Martin has become our president. -He is a great European and a great Scot. He has the deepest understanding of the politics of Scotland, the UK and the EU.- "He also brings a passion for peace, prosperity and democracy, values that are at the core of the European ideal," Clarke added. -We are proud to have secured the commitment of such a distinguished political leader.- Load-Date: January 18, 2024  End of Document
