   Former monastery is a 'magical retreat' from Brexit Britain i-news January 27, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 35 Length: 363 words Byline: Silvia Marchetti Body   A75-year-old Briton has credited Brexit for prompting him to ditch life in the UK in favour of a seasonal lifestyle in Tuscany, where he has transformed a historic monastery into a luxury retreat. Steven Newell bought a 13th-century former monastery in the mountainous Garfagnana and opened it to guests as I Romiti del Torrente in 2014. He was inspired to remain full-time in 2018, before post-Brexit travel restrictions came in and applying for residency in the EU became more complicated. "I took up residency in Italy after the Brexit [vote] as otherwise, with the 90-day limit for being there as a British citizen, there was no way I could run the business," Mr Newell told i. Travelling to the EU and the Schengen area for Britons is now limited to 90 days or less in a 180-day period. "It was heartbreaking and a big challenge for me and my family, like many people with strong ties to both UK and Europe," he said. Mr Newell had lived in London since 1972. He got married twice, raised five daughters and ran a glass business. For decades, he went back and forth between the UK and Tuscany until Brexit changed his life. "I have been attached to this region since 1979 when I first came on holiday," Mr Newell said. He has no immediate plans to return to the UK. Moving to Tuscany has benefited him with a healthier, "seasonal" slower-paced lifestyle, he said. "The sounds of the goat bells and the local shepherd calling his dog, the swallows that swoop overhead… I love the sounds and smells of this valley," he says. "Life in London has many wonderful things but... what I have here is this magical balance between nature, history and culture, not to mention the food and wine, of course." He fell in love with the decaying and abandoned monastery at "first sight" because he could feel the "electric atmosphere of all the lives and stories that had come before". It has since been returned to its former glory, complete with stained glass windows in the chapel. The site is used to host workshops and creative retreats. It also contains the ruins of a Roman wall and road. The monastery once served as a resting point for pilgrims and travellers en route from Canterbury to Rome. Load-Date: January 27, 2024  End of Document
