   Fury as Scottish drugs deaths - already the worst in Europe - surge another 10% as Humza Yousaf tries to blame Brexit for SNP's 'disastrous' management of public services MailOnline March 12, 2024 Tuesday 10:56 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 859 words Byline: Greg Heffer, Political Correspondent For Mailonline Body   The SNP were today blasted for failing to tackle Scotland's 'national shame' as latest figures showed a 10 per cent rise in suspected drugs deaths in the country.  New data published by the Scottish Government showed 1,197 people died as a result of suspected drug use last year. This was up by 105 from 2022 and reversed a decline in suspected drugs deaths in Scotland over recent years. Scottish Tory leader Douglas Ross said the figures were a 'shocking indictment of the SNP's failure to tackle our national shame' after 17 years in power. Even before last year's rise, Scotland already had the highest rate of drug deaths in Europe - including the rest of Great Britain. The latest figures were published as SNP leader Humza Yousaf prepared to use a speech tonight to blame Brexit for Scotland's 'damaged' public services. But, ahead of his address at the London School of Economics, critics claimed the First Minister was 'looking for any excuse to cover up the failings of the SNP'. The suspected drugs death figures were produced using police data and showed Greater Glasgow recorded the highest number of drug deaths last year with 303. This was more than double the 147 seen in Lanarkshire - the second highest. Men continue to account for the highest proportion of deaths, at 73 per cent, while 27 per cent were women. The 35 to 54 age group continued to have the highest proportion of suspected drug deaths, accounting for two-thirds of the total, while under-25s made up 5 per cent of the total. The Scottish Tories urged the SNP-led Scottish Government to support their Right to Recovery (Scotland) Bill, which would enshrine in law the right to receive 'potentially life-saving' treatment, including residential rehabilitation. Mr Ross said: 'Another 1,197 lives lost. A shocking indictment of the SNP's failure to tackle our national shame.' He urged Mr Yousaf not to 'repeat Nicola Sturgeon's mistakes', adding: 'Back our Right to Recovery Bill so we can ensure everyone who needs treatment gets it.' Scottish Labour deputy leader Dame Jackie Baillie described the figures as 'tragic', claiming they showed the Scottish Government's approach was 'not working'. 'Scotland remains in the grip of a drug death health emergency with lives being needlessly lost,' she added. 'We cannot allow any more delay to the implementation of drug checking facilities and the pilot safer drug consumption room in Glasgow.' The figures were published ahead of Mr Yousaf's appearance at the London School of Economics tonight. He will use the speech to claim spending on Scotland's public services would be £1.6billion higher if the UK was still in the EU. 'In Scotland, I believe there is broad public agreement that Brexit has damaged the economy and public services, and that it should be reversed,' Mr Yousaf will say. 'Yet at Westminster there is agreement between Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer that the UK should stay out of both the EU and the huge European single market - whatever the cost.' The First Minister will claim Scottish independence would result in a return to the EU for Scotland and an increase in living standards. 'The National Institute for Economic and Social Research suggests that compared to EU membership, the UK economy was 2.5 per cent smaller in 2023 and it expects that figure to rise to 5.7 per cent in little more than 10 years' time,' he will add. 'That means £69billion could have been wiped from national income in 2023, equating to £28billion of tax revenue - £2.3billion in terms of Scotland's population share. 'Around 60 per cent of spending in Scotland is on devolved services. With the same level of borrowing and taxation, that means without Brexit devolved spending power for our vital public services, such as the NHS, could have been £1.6billion higher than it is today. 'In other words, Scotland has suffered an estimated £1.6 billion cut that could have been invested in our NHS because of a Brexit that people in Scotland overwhelmingly rejected.' NIESR deputy director Stephen Millard said the First Minister's estimate was 'a little high' and the figure was likely closer to 'around £1.2 billion'. Scottish Conservative shadow finance and economy secretary Liz Smith said: 'As usual, Humza Yousaf is looking for any excuse to cover up the failings of the SNP Government. 'The reality is that if economic growth in Scotland had matched that of the rest of the UK, the SNP would have had billions more to spend on public services - and we would have been spared Shona Robison's disastrous tax-and-axe budget.' Scottish Labour economy spokesman Daniel Johnson said: 'Years of economic incompetence by the SNP has robbed Scots of opportunity and starved the public purse of funds. 'While the Tories have created economic turmoil across the UK, the SNP has made a bad picture worse. If Scotland's economy had grown at the same pace as the UK as a whole between 2012 and 2021, it would be £8.5billion larger. 'Scotland deserves better than the low growth, low pay economy the SNP and the Tories have built. 'Labour will work to deliver the fastest growth in the G7, so we can create jobs, invest in public services and strengthen communities.' Load-Date: March 12, 2024  End of Document
