   Gloating Tories will test Simon's faith in McEntee Mail on Sunday (London) April 30, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; OPINION, COLUMN; Pg. 12 Length: 837 words Byline: brenda power Body   'Oh, the irony of the Irish Republic whining about the very border arrangement they insisted upon with the Protocol.' THIS comment, from Reform UK leader Richard Tice, pretty much sums up the childish gloating of certain sections of British politics and media over the current immigration impasse between our two countries. It serves us right, apparently, for pig-headedly sticking to the terms of the international peace treaty known as the Good Friday Agreement, when the Brexiteers had completely ignored its implications for their grand project. The only reason we insisted on an open border on the island, after all, was to thwart Brexit, not to keep the peace that had saved thousands of lives over two decades. We should have abandoned it to make it easier for the Brexiteers to 'take back control' of their borders, like the good little colonials we're supposed to be. Coverage You won't see much coverage in the pro-Brexit, anti-Irish media about the (EURO)700million bonanza that Brexit has delivered to our national coffers in custhe toms duties on imports of food, clothing and other goods coming into the country from Great Britain. That's because Brexit is a zero-sum game, you see, and in order for them to be winning, everyone else must be losing. Which is why they're loving the difficulties their asylum policies have caused for us, and outraged at our plans to resolve them. That's not to say that Britain's response to the immigration crisis hasn't created a mess for both our countries, in which our open border is certainly a factor, and it has the potential to spark a major diplomatic incident between us. Tensions over the movement of asylum seekers from Britain to Ireland through the North ramped up last week when Minister for Justice Helen McEntee revealed 80% of recent arrivals, mainly from Nigeria, had used that route. Previously, such immigrants could have been sent back to the UK, but after Britain embarked on its plan to deport asylum seekers to Rwanda, our High Court decreed it was no longer a 'safe third country', and international law prevents the deportation of asylum seekers to countries where they will be at risk. Not surprisingly, the claim that 80% of our asylum seekers have fled Britain was music to the ears of UK prime minister Rishi Sunak, just at the point in the current election cycle when he needed a win. He seized on it as proof that their Rwanda policy was 'working' as a deterrent to people seeking asylum in Britain. And last week, Tánaiste Micheál Martin spelled out that Britain's so-called 'success' on the asylum issue was at our expense. And 'maybe', he said, 'that's the impact it was designed to have'. Barely a wet week in the job, and with a Minister for Justice whose handling of the asylum issue so far hasn't exactly been stellar, Taoiseach Simon Harris found himself propelled into a head-on collision with the British government. On Sunday, he announced he had asked Minister McEntee to bring proposals to Cabinet for emergency legislation to remove the 'safe country' obstacle and allow refugees to be returned to the UK again. 'This country will not, in any way, shape or form, provide a loophole for anybody else's migration challenges,' he said. There was a 'returns agreement in place between Ireland and Britain' before the High Court decision, Taoiseach said, and the Irish Government is entitled to expect that to be honoured as soon as our amended law allows the process to resume. Minister McEntee was meant to be meeting British home secretary James Cleverly to discuss the issue yesterday, but that was postponed at short notice when the conflict turned into a scene from a Quentin Tarantino movie - a three-way Mexican stand-off involving Ireland, Britain and France. Soured Sunak responded to the Taoiseach by telling him to amend any law he likes, but that 'it's up to the UK to decide who we do and do not accept into our country'. And, he said, they won't be accepting any migrants back from Ireland until France starts accepting migrants, the so-called 'small boat arrivals' who cross the Channel in flimsy dinghies, back from the UK. So who will blink first? Relations with Britain, soured by Brexit, had improved greatly since the Windsor Framework was agreed, and especially after the resumption of the Stormont Assembly in February. But given the magnitude of the immigration issue for both the Irish and British governments, with elections in the offing, neither can be seen to back down on this one. This is a big test for a new Taoiseach who is already on notice that he has just six weeks to deliver on immigration, ahead of the local and European elections. At the time of his appointment, he pledged his confidence in Minister McEntee, amid calls from within the Coalition to replace her because she was looking increasingly out of her depth. As she's now on the frontline facing down Britain, and demanding our EU partners do their bit to resolve this stand-off, the next few days will tell just how wellplaced that confidence was. Load-Date: April 30, 2024  End of Document
