   It's good enough for Big Sam! Ministers defend launch of pints of wine on supermarket shelves from September - despite claims there will be 'little to no demand' MailOnline May 2, 2024 Thursday 12:17 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:2 Length: 584 words Byline: Zac Campbell Body   Pint-sized wine bottles are set to be available at UK supermarkets later this year Pint-sized bottles of wine are expected to be allowed on UK shelves from September, a business minister has said, amid doubts over demand. Kevin Hollinrake said seven changes to pre-packaged wine sizes are due to come into force on September 19, as he insisted they will support the 'thriving' UK wine sector by providing opportunities for 'innovation and greater choice'. But the SNP's Patrick Grady said the Government should admit there is 'little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit'.  The announcement saw former England football manager Sam Allardyce labelled as a visionary, after he was seen drinking a pint of wine while eating at a Chinese restaurant. The Glasgow North MP went on to urge the Government to 'admit that its Brexit dream of people quaffing pints of wine' was always a 'fantasy', adding: 'In fact the reality is a Brexit nightmare of border checks, of reduced consumer choice and of business closures.' Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch replied: 'I can't imagine why anyone would be complaining about the sale of pints of wine. If he doesn't like it, he doesn't have to buy it.' In December, the Government announced the move to introduce the 568ml size would sit alongside 200ml and 500ml measures already available. The highly-circulated image of Allardyce emerged as part of the sting operation that saw him sacked from his role as Three Lions boss in 2016.  The former Bolton Wanderers, West Ham United and Everton manager had agreed to meetings in Mayfair and Manchester with undercover reporters posing as representatives of a fictitious firm that wanted to buy players.  This saw Allardyce caught up in an expose discussing a proposed £400,000 arrangement that would see him fly to Singapore and Hong Kong to address investors in the non-existent company.  Pint bottles of Champagne were sold in the UK before Britain joined the European Common Market and were on shelves until 1973. But their production ceased as they did not comply with EU weights and measures rules. Mr Hollinrake told the Commons: 'The 568ml pint quantity is one of several changes in pre-packed wine sizes that are expected to come into force on September 19 2024, supporting the thriving UK wine sector by providing opportunities for innovation and greater choice.' Mr Grady said Mr Hollinrake's answer was 'nowhere near as definitive' as the Government press release from December, which was headlined: 'Pints of wine stocked on Britain's shelves for the first time ever.' Mr Grady said: 'Not will be stocked, not might be stocked, not could be stocked, not to be stocked - it implied that pints of wine were and are available to buy right now in shops across the UK. 'Will the Government admit that the reality is there's been little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit and in fact it's entirely possible pints of wine will never be stocked on UK shelves?' Mr Hollinrake replied: 'Well it's never difficult to distinguish the right honourable gentleman from a ray of sunshine, is it? 'Our wine industry is thriving. Over 900 vineyards across Great Britain, the UK wine industry produced 12.2 million bottles of wine in 2022 and our new post-Brexit powers provide new options, including new legislation which aligns existing sizes across still and sparkling pre-packed wine so that both can be sold in 200ml and 500ml quantities, which we know there is good demand for.' Load-Date: May 3, 2024  End of Document
