   kjkjh kjh kjh kj hk jh kjhkjh kj hk jh kjh kjh kj hkj hk jhk jh The Herald (Glasgow) May 6, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 Newsquest Media Group All Rights Reserved  Section: Pg. 15 Length: 1732 words Byline: F L-Mark Smith  Body   CHRISTOPHER H Jones (Letters, October 29) alleges Ruth Marr "fails to grasp the case that the UK Government has injected more than £2 billion and rising into the economy in order to support jobs, the economy and people's livelihoods during the current pandemic". The fact is, though, that the Chancellor had little alternative, faced with a total lockdown which would mean millions of employees otherwise having no source of income from employment. This is turn would have had two consequences. First, the economy would have practically disappeared without trace as the level of spend would have diminished very substantially (at the same time, making even more people unemployed).  Secondly, faced with no income other than benefits (if that system could have withstood the number of people making new claims) it is not impossible that social order might well have broken down  in the worst affected areas. In short, the Chancellor's action  was not only a political, but also, even more so, a functional necessity. However, as Ms Marr points out, "you can never trust a Tory", which despite Mr Jones's protestations is to my mind a reasonable comment on the policies of successive Tory governments, and in this regard the present one is certainly no better and might indeed be worse. Remember the Furlough Scheme paid 80 per cent of wages, but the Job Retention Scheme from November will only pay up to two-thirds. I don't think anyone would welcome their income falling by this degree, but imagine what it will be like for those employed on two-thirds of the Living Wage (£9.30 outside London according to the Living Wage Foundation, so £6.10 an hour). As for those who will be put on two-thirds of the National Minimum Wage (which is £8.72 an hour, so £5.76), frankly words fail me.  Then there are those who have to self-isolate who are put on statutory sick pay, or worst of all, "unauthorised absence without pay". Is it any wonder the most deprived areas are typically the most severely affected by Covid19, as so many simply cannot afford financially to self-isolate? Does this not make Mr Jones' shiny claim of "more than £2 billion and rising" injected into the economy to "protect livelihoods" seem, if not tarnished then significantly inadequate? In conclusion could I point out to Bill Eadie (Letters, October 29) that the Scottish Government is funded for devolved matters only and there will only be consequentials for those matters. Thus, much of the money spent in Scotland by Westminster is spent on matters that are retained there and are its responsibility. Moreover, it comes from tax revenue that Scotland contributes similarly to other parts of the  UK. Alasdair Galloway,  Dumbarton. kjhkjhkj kjhkjhkjhgjhg AS we approach the end of October, a question arises: exactly whose side is the Westminster Government on ? The furlough scheme is ending, plunging thousands into job insecurity and possible redundancy, with no equivalent scheme put in place. Today is the deadline for applications for mortgage holidays, again plunging many into insecurity. Those two are enormous elements of daily living, presenting such insecurity for thousands; it is a tragedy. But with Westminster, it does not stop there. This is also the deadline to secure a Brexit deal, allowing time for ratification, a deal that will be vital for our economy, trading and future employment, yet a no-deal looks more likely by the day. It's rather convenient for the Conservative Government that Westminster is in recess. Catriona C Clark,  Falkirk. lkjlkj lkjlkjl kjlkjlk jlkjhkjhkjhkjhk NOW we know why Nicola Sturgeon takes the daily press conference herself. John Swinney announced today (October 30), with little warning, that senior pupils must wear a face mask at all times in school. Why now and not earlier and as there is to be no penalty for not wearing it, just how effective is this measure going to be? This implies transmission has been occurring in schools all along. Is the slavish desire to keep schools open yet knee-jerk reactions to closing down hospitality where social distancing was at least on the "menu" not an admission that perhaps the Scottish Government has not yet quite got this situation under control?  The only method that did work was a complete lockdown. The only method of avoiding this is indeed the circuit breaker idea. Nothing else seems to be even partially effective.  The economic damage is the elephant in the room. The wisdom of Solomon is called for, not confusing tiers and changes of regulations. Unfortunately, neither John Swinney nor Nicola Sturgeon fits the job description. Dr Gerald Edwards,  Glasgow G77. lkjlkj lkjlkjl kjlkjlk jlkjhkjhkjhkjhk THE United Kingdom faces a Herculean task in fighting off the SNP and its independence project. The fundamental issue is that the majority of SNP supporters view independence through rose-tinted glasses, and it is perceived as a magical utopian panacea in which all of Scotland's problems (and there are many) will suddenly disappear.  In the minds of the nationalists, the notion of independence transcends all other considerations, and despite numerous failures (not least, the care home deaths, the Alex Salmond affair, the disastrous Scottish economy) the independence evangelists continue to support Nicola Sturgeon and her single issue party.  In the middle of the worst pandemic in living memory, the idea of another referendum should be forgotten and the single unifying priority of the Scottish SNP Government should be to protect Scottish citizens and prepare the country for a full recovery. Ian Forbes,  Glasgow G41. lkjlkj lkjlkjl kjlkjlk jlkjhkjhkjhkjhk IT is inevitable that the predicted election of Joe Biden as US President next week will lead to a further decline of the UK's global standing. Where formerly the UK was seen as Europe's "centre of gravity" in the eyes of the US, a post-Brexit Britain will be replaced by Paris and Berlin in this respect, while the UK will be seen very much as an outlier, sitting on the sidelines. Both economically and in security terms the UK has burnt its bridges through Brexit and will not have the same prominence as it used to in Washington. It is no wonder that commentators have pointed to the fact that Prime Minister Johnson is willing on a Trump victory to decide on whether to leave the European Union with or without a trade deal.  The British Government will face a major challenge in building relations with Biden's team, who view Brexit as a risk to the EU's stability. Biden already sent a warning shot last month, when he tweeted that "the Good Friday Agreement that brought peace to Northern Ireland" cannot become "a casualty of Brexit". The UK must therefore prepare for a Biden administration that keeps a particularly close eye on how Brexit affects Ireland, given the Irish influence in the Democratic party and Biden's own Irish background.  Through the foolishness of Brexit, the UK has put itself out of an influential position in the EU and delivered a further blow to its standing on the global stage. Alex Orr, Edinburgh EH9. lkjlkj lkjlkjl kjlkjlk jlkjhkjhkjhkjhk AS politicians and unions squabble about lost jobs, the real environmental tragedy of BiFab ("Senior lawyer dismisses claims over Bifab ministerial bailout", The Herald, October 30) seems to have been entirely forgotten. We are supposed to be saving the planet, not wrecking it. Vast, industrial wind turbines, plonked among our dolphins, bristling on our once-pristine horizons should never have been approved in the first place. Everyone has forgotten the RSPB was so incensed by the hugely-damaging Firth of Forth offshore wind farms - it described them as "the most damaging windfarms for seabirds anywhere in the world" and the Firth of Forth as "of international importance to wildlife". It was so appalled by the Scottish Government's cavalier attitude to birdlife it took the Government all the way to the Supreme Court. Green energy schemes are in fact increasing CO2 emissions, increasing the use of fossil fuels and vastly increasing the mining, processing and consumption of the Earth's dwindling raw materials. Another meticulous review just published in the scientific journal Energies by a team of Irish and US-based researchers confirms this: "Renewable energy is cripplingly expensive, hopelessly unreliable, massacres wildlife, destroys landscapes, destabilises the grid, harms indigenous peoples, and actually causes climate change". We really should be asking: If renewables are so great for the environment, why do they keep destroying it? George Herraghty, Lhanbryde, Moray. lkjlkj lkjlkjl kjlkjlk jlkjhkjhkjhkjhk ANDY Stenton wonders why the Government's five-tier coronavirus response system is numbered 0-4 rather than 1-5 (Letters, October 29). I believe the reason, paradoxically, has been to keep things simple by aligning tiers 1-3, more or less, with those in England. This implies that Tier 0 has been an addition to a catalogue that already exists, and there are impressive precedents for this.  The composer Anton Bruckner said his D minor symphony of 1866 was worthless ("gilt nicht") and declared it nullified ("annuliert"). It wasn't published or performed until 1924, when it became known as Symphony No. 0 ("Die Nullte"). And then there are 4 Laws of Thermodynamics, numbered 0 - 3. It was the great Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell who realised, retrospectively, that the statement, "If a body C be in thermal equilibrium with two other bodies A and B, then A and B are in thermal equilibrium with one another" could not be accepted, a priori, as obvious, but had to be experimentally demonstrated. Hence this became the "zeroth" law of thermodynamics.  So the Scottish Government is in good company. We must all long for Tier 0. Dr Hamish Maclaren, Stirling. lkjlkj lkjlkjl kjlkjlk jlkjhkjhkjhkjhk NAE trick or treatin', nae guisin', nae gaun roon the doors, Nae dookin' fir aipples oan cobweb fill'd floors. Nae witches, nae monsters, nae vampires or ghouls,  Halloween hiz bin cancelled, it's against aw the rules! Nae monkey nuts, nae lollies, nae mouldy tangerines, We're aw in tier 3, so that's whit it means. Nae fun fir the weans, they're aw highly contagious, In a world that's gone mad, it's frankly outrageous.  So ah'm no really pleased wi' this, as ye kin probably tell, Cos I'll jist eat those braw sweeties aw by masel! Stuart McLean, Kirkintilloch. Load-Date: May 6, 2024  End of Document
