   London against Paris Handelszeitung (English) May 2024  Copyright 2024 Ringier Axel Springer Schweiz AG All Rights Reserved  Section: ART; Pg. NaN; No. 22 Length: 1312 words Byline: Dirk Boll Highlight: The race for the leading marketplace in Europe is entering the next round. Can Paris benefit even more from Brexit? Body      DIRK BOLL London and Paris have been competing for the leading role in the European art trade for centuries. While Paris initially benefited from the art enthusiasm of the French kings and their courts, the increasing internationalization of British society became a strategic advantage. Aristocrats returning home from their cavalier journey, the "Grand Tour ", had learned to appreciate the art of the continent, and their collecting activities gave rise to a highly specialized and efficient art market in London - including the companies Christie's, Sotheby's, Phillips and Bonhams, which still dominate the auction world today. Over the next 200 years, the course of world history would almost exclusively strengthen London as a location: As early as the 19th century, England had the larger (and wealthier) middle class, which increasingly dominated the demand for art, as well as the more liberal auction laws. In the 20th century, the dominance of American buyers meant a concentration on English rules and the English language. Most recently, Paris (and in some cases even New York) were preferred by collectors from emerging regions. The game changer was Brexit It was not until the 21st century that the pendulum swung back. Almost as a footnote to the narrative, it should be noted that in 2001, the 400-year-old French auction law was renewed in line with EU regulations, which created modern structures and enabled the French auction market to be integrated into global networks. The loss of business with Russian art and Russian collectors in "Londongrad", on the other hand, is a negligible disadvantage, as their market share was recently less than 5 percent. The real game changer was the UK's exit from the European Union. This took place on January 31, 2020, since when the London marketplace has no longer been part of the EU single market and customs union. Since the UK population voted in favor of this move in 2016, Brexit has affected all markets; most visibly through the fall in the value of the British pound sterling. With the exit, the UK became a third country for the EU and vice versa. This means that since January 1, 2021, all goods must be imported and exported - with a certain amount of customs formalities for import VAT. This amounts to 5 percent for imports to the UK; for exports, it varies depending on the country to which the goods are exported. These complexities are compounded by the fact that the freedom to provide services ended when the UK left the EU, meaning that British companies are cut off from the pool of new talent in the Union. New costs and taxes have raised the threshold at which it is worthwhile to bring works of art to London for sale. The direct beneficiaries have been mid-market companies whose supply is largely below or around this new threshold. As a result, auctions and fairs, particularly in Paris but also in other continental European marketplaces, have experienced an increase in sales. The "Art Basel UBS Global Art Market Report" already showed a strong impact on the national market in 2020, as the UK had lost a disproportionate amount of market share in the wake of Brexit uncertainty, but was still the global number two after the USA. London only had to cede this position to China in 2023, as it had lost further sales to Paris. Formats were also lost: Auction companies relocated specialist departments and auctions to Paris, for example Surrealism (Sotheby's) or Italian Art (Christie's). In addition, Art Basel's parent company Swiss Exhibition (MCH) discontinued the Masterpiece Fair in London in 2023. Art Basel expands to Paris At the same time, players from outside London also expanded in or to Paris: from leading galleries such as Gagosian and Thaddaeus Ropac to the international auctioneers, who have since been able to process a higher number of objects and auctions with larger premises. Bonhams expanded by taking over the long-established French auctioneer Cornette de Saint Cyr. However, the expansion of Art Basel in 2022 had a particularly signal effect. The Paris Fiac (Foire internationale d'art contemporain), founded in 1974 and permanently housed in the Grand Palais since 2006, lost the tender for the rental contracts for the venue, which were taken over by the new art fair "Paris+ par Art Basel ". This development lent credibility to a message: Paris, with its overwhelming cultural and consumer offerings and now improved art market structures, is the future. Or does it? From a macro perspective, the initial impression is that the transformation processes are complete for the time being: London sales declines and Paris growth have been lower every year since 2019, so it can be assumed that a level of consolidation has now been reached. On the other hand, London has been able to expand its market share at the top end of the market - at Christie's alone, the share of individual prices over 1 million was 24% in London in 2023, compared to just 5% in Paris. These figures underline the fact that Paris' strengths lie more in niche markets such as applied art, design and photography, whereas the multi-million euro works of the 20th century continue to be offered in London. The growth drivers of the smaller collecting areas also indicate an advantage for London: while old art from Africa, nowadays also referred to as "art premier", is traded in Paris, contemporary art from Africa, as well as art from other non-European regions, continues to find its home on the London stage: from the auction and gallery offerings of Middle Eastern art to the evening auctions for Islamic art and the leading fair for contemporary African art, "1-54 ", which is held annually at Somerset House. There are also some surprising London advantages: For one, the customs border can reduce costs if the work is sold with tax paid on the margin and then exported to the EU: If a work is sold that has been consigned by a gallery or art dealer, or more rarely by a corporate collection or foundation, it is not subject to (value-added) tax. The buyer therefore pays this tax not only on the buyer's premium, but on the total amount. If the object is exported, VAT is only paid on the buyer's premium in London. When importing into the EU, the tax on the hammer price is replaced by the respective country's import sales tax. On the buyer's side, this means a tax advantage of over 10 percent compared to a purchase in the home country! Another positive location factor for London is on the horizon. The planned introduction of a central credit register in the Goods Mortgages Act could mean that in future it will be easier to transfer mobile goods as security in the UK without having to move them. In the USA, this form of creditor protection means that loan-financed works of art can adorn the walls of collectors' homes, whereas in Europe they have to be (physically) handed over to the lender. The significance of such a development becomes clear when you consider that, according to the "Art Basel UBS Global Art Market Report" from the 2023 reporting year, 43 percent of all art purchases worldwide were financed on credit. The other figures in this Art Report also point to London's lead. For all the euphoria about the rise of Paris, it must be noted that the market in the UK is still significantly larger: while France had a market share of 7 percent of the global art market in 2023, the UK's market share was 17 percent. Brexit may have weakened London less than expected, partly because this global hub sells less than 20 percent of its supply to EU countries. Ars longa in Londinium! Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word. Original full page PDF Graphic    Francis Bacon (1909-1992): "Landscape near Malabata, Tangier ", 1963, sold at Christie's in London on March 7, 2024 for 19.6 million pounds. Ferrari 250 GT SWB Berlinetta, 1960, sold by RM Sotheby's in Paris on January 31, 2024 for 10.2 million euros. Pablo Picasso (1881-1973), "Homme à la pipe", 1968, sold by Sotheby's in London on March 6, 2024 for 13.7 million pounds. Load-Date: May 31, 2024  End of Document
