   Londoners have almost (EURO)4,000 less because of Brexit, says mayor CE Noticias Financieras English January 11, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 371 words Body   London, Jan 11 (EFE) - Londoners are worse off because of Brexit, or British exit from the European Union (EU), and have about 3,400 pounds (3,944 euros) less per year, according to the mayor of the British capital, Labour's Sadiq Khan. In a speech tonight outside the City Hall in London's financial center -Mansion House-, which has been previewed to the media, Khan will refer to the impact of Brexit on the economy of this capital and will call for a new agreement with the European bloc in order to improve the capital's economy and raise the standard of living. Britons voted in a referendum on June 23, 2016 in favor of leaving the EU. The UK officially left the bloc on January 31, 2020, when a transition period began and ended on December 31 of that year, after reaching a free trade agreement between London and the European club. London's first mayor will call for a new agreement after research commissioned by City Hall, by the analysis firm Cambridge Econometrics, noted that in 2023 the capital generated about 30 billion pounds (34,800 euros) less due to Brexit. This implies, according to the city council, that the average Londoner had £3,400 less. "It's obvious that Brexit is not working," will say Khan, who sees the separation from Brussels as hurting the economy, so he will call for building "a closer relationship" with the EU. "I'd rather not talk about Brexit again. But part of being mayor of London is about standing up for our city. We have to be frank: Brexit is simply not a peripheral concern that we can leave in the past; it is a key contributor to the cost of living crisis at the moment and is resulting in lost opportunities, lost business and lost revenue at a time when people and businesses can least afford it," he will insist. "They are making food more expensive, increasing pressures on households and it is having a detrimental impact on industries that are crucial to our success such as hospitality, construction and financial services," the mayor will add. In addition, the aforementioned research noted that in 2023 the UK had 1.8 million fewer jobs compared to a projected scenario in which Brexit would not have occurred, of which 290,000 jobs would have been in London. EFE vg/prc/ad Load-Date: January 12, 2024  End of Document
