   Losses from leaving the EU could total £125bn per year i-news January 27, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 567 words Byline: Richard Vaughan Body   It was the moment Boris Johnson declared he had finally got Brexit done as he steered the UK out of the European Union hailing an "astonishing moment of hope". But as Wednesday's fourth anniversary of 31 January 2020 "Brexit Day" approaches, the optimistic picture the then prime minister painted seems a long way from being realised. The country still faces a raft of ongoing loose ends and disruptions, and economists are warning that the Brexit dividend could actually amount to a £125bn-a-year loss. Yesterday marked another blow to the UK's efforts to set up post-Brexit trade deals as negotiations on a potential deal with Canada broke down after nearly two years due to a disagreement over cheese and beef. And according to those on the front line dealing with the changes brought about by Brexit, the UK could be about to witness a new wave of disruption. Among the first major challenges looming into view is the Government's plan to introduce post-Brexit customs checks on EU imports from April (see story below). But the bigger problems come in October when the new European Entry System is expected to be introduced by Brussels, prompting warnings of chaos for passengers, hauliers and ultimately consumers. Under the new measures, non-EU passport holders will be required to provide retinal or facial scans as well as scanning their passports when entering the EU, which industry experts have said will cause bedlam in port crossings, such as Dover and Felixstowe. There are concerns from the likes of Logistics UK - which represents the freight industry - that Kent could become "clogged up" as a result of the miles of tailbacks caused by new border checks due to come in. It is feared that this could lead to European hauliers refusing to send their trucks to the UK for fear they will be trapped in huge traffic jams. David Wells, chief executive of Logistics UK, told i: "A truck driver heading down to Dover - and there are 10,000 trucks crossing every day at Dover - will usually park up, hand over their passport and then drive on. It's a very slick operation. "Under the changes, you'll have to park up, get out of the lorry, walk to a cubicle where you will have to have your retina, fingerprint and passport scanned, walk back to your lorry, start your vehicle and drive off." Unlike four years ago, when the Conservatives stood on a pledge to "get Brexit done" the next election is unlikely to see Brexit feature as prominently. In the intervening years since leaving the EU, a small majority of voters has supported the idea of rejoining the bloc. A Tory MP in a "Red Wall" seat said the focus was now on immigration rather than Brexit. "In my area the attention that previously went on Brexit has gone into immigration instead. People voted Leave because they wanted to cut immigration and they now want to see that happen," the MP said. Economist Thomas Sampson, an associate professor at the London School of Economics, says Brexit is costing the UK between £75bn and £125bn each year, the equivalent to 3 to 5 per cent of GDP, and he expects the loss to be permanent. "The overall consensus is that the referendum vote has made things worse," he said. "The sunlit uplands have not arrived at all." The Government was approached for comment. Previous research has found that just two minutes of extra checks can lead to queues extending up to 30 miles from Dover and waits of nearly five hours. Load-Date: January 27, 2024  End of Document
