   Million 'undecided' voters critical of Brexit -and want Labour to pursue closer EU ties mirror.co.uk January 6, 2024 Saturday 6:56 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:1 Length: 399 words Byline: By, Mikey Smith Highlight: A mega poll found more voters said they wanted Keir Starmer to seek a closer UK-EU relationship -and those in the crucial 'undecided' column feel even more strongly Body   A million undecided voters believe Brexit has made Britain's problems worse -and want a Labour government to pursue closer ties with the EU, a new poll has found.   In all but one constituency in the UK, more voters said they wanted Keir Starmer to seek a closer UK-EU relationship. And undecided voters -who will be crucial to victory in this year's election -are even more critical of Brexit.  A mega poll commissioned by campaign group Best for Britain found most people feel the Government's Brexit deal has increased the cost of their weekly shop, reduced the availability of goods and services, made the small boats crisis worse and stunted economic growth. And half said it has restricted their ability to see a doctor 50%. Nationally, some 45% want a Labour government to seek closer ties, with one in five wanting the status quo -and fewer than one in ten wanting greater divergence. Even in the heavily Leave voting Boston and Skegness the most popular option was 'don't know' -with 'a closer relationship' beating 'no change' and 'greater distance'. Analysis of the poll of 10,006 voters conducted by Focaldata identified as many as a million undecided voters who say they would consider voting tactically to change the government and who may prove pivotal at the next election. And polling suggests these voters believe Brexit has had a negative impact on everyday life far more than the wider population.  They are more likely to be women, university educated, of working age, homeowners and closely split between Remain and Leave voters in 2016 and Labour and Tory voters in 2019. Winning over voters like these could be crucial for Labour in marginal seats, particularly if Reform UK stands down candidates in favour of the Conservatives as UKIP and Brexit Party did in 2017 and 2019.  Naomi Smith, CEO of Best for Britain, said: "Even undecided voters know Brexit has hit them in the pocket and made almost every issue facing Britain worse. Despite their unshakable lead, winning these undecided voters could be the difference between an unprecedented landslide for Labour or a narrow win, particularly when Farage has form in helping the Tories in marginal constituencies even after promising not to. "That's why Best for Britain will relaunch GetVoting.org this year to help voters get it right and understand which opposition party is best placed to unseat the Government in their area." Load-Date: January 6, 2024  End of Document
