   NATS' DATA FURY BREXIT STRATEGY; ANOTHER PAD MOVE FROM SNP Humza aides' bid to deflect from Matheson row The Sun (England) February 11, 2024 Sunday Edition 2, Scotland  Copyright 2024 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 340 words Byline: OLIVER NORTON Body   HUMZA Yousaf's special advisers tried to deflect criticism of Michael Matheson's £11,00 iPad bill by blaming Brexit, we can reveal. Critics last night accused Nats of focusing on "downright bizarre" point-scoring over the eye-watering holiday data bill. They hit out at an aide's email sent on November 9 after the huge sum - racked up when the former Cabinet Secretary for Net Zero, Energy and Transport visited Morocco with family - was revealed in parly expenses. Scottish Government special adviser Kate Higgins wrote: "Presumably Mr Matheson's charges relate to foreign travel when cab sec NZeT. "Can we make sure lines cover Brexit being reason any of us have roaming charges in Europe?" Since Britain voted to leave the European Union, travellers are no longer guaranteed free roaming on mobile devices in member countries. Holyrood officials initially refused to publish the email exchange but it was released after a Freedom of Information appeal. Scots Tory chair Craig Hoy hit out: "This shows the SNP machine closing ranks to protect Michael Matheson. "And one aide's bright idea of blaming Brexit, rather than Mr Matheson trying to pin costs on the taxpayer is downright bizarre, since Morocco has never been in the EU." Lib Dem MP Christine Jardine weighed in last night: "In the midst of an unfolding scandal, taxpayer-funded advisers were looking for a way to score political points." The Scottish Government insisted: "This was an exchange in advance of FMQs and the likelihood of the First Minister being asked about it." Mr Matheson initially claimed he ran up the bill doing constituencywork. He later claimed to have discovered his sons used his MSP device as a hotspot to stream footie and agreed to cover the full cost. He quit as Health Secretary last week ahead of a scandal probe's findings. The SNP said: "Mr Matheson has co-operated fully with the Scottish Parliament Corporate Body process." lines reason roaming oliver.norton@news.co.uk Can we make sure lines cover Brexit being reason any of us have roaming charges in Europe? Graphic    Mr Matheson & Ms Higgins Load-Date: February 11, 2024  End of Document
