   New diplomatic crisis between Ireland and the United Kingdom over migrants fleeing via Belfast CE Noticias Financieras English May 1, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1158 words Body    Premier Rishi Sunak should not be interested now in a diplomatic crisis with Ireland. One of the main achievements of his mandate was precisely to seal a new pact with the neighboring country to unblock years of tensions over the problems caused by Brexit. But politics is fickle and it turns out that the new London-Dublin standoff has now become Downing Street's best campaign because it means that its controversial law to deport asylum seekers to Rwanda is working. Or so says the Tory leader.  With the controversial regulation -of dubious legality- immigrants arriving in the UK by irregular routes are crossing into the Republic of Ireland in order to avoid being deported to the African country.  It was Ireland's own Minister for Justice, Helen McEntee, who explained in the Dublin parliament that 80% of the most recent asylum seekers had arrived in the Republic from the British province of Northern Ireland. She stressed that, so far this year, "a significant majority of people" seeking asylum in Ireland had applied at an international protection office rather than at a port or airport, suggesting that people were coming from the UK across the land border.  The Irish government is preparing emergency legislation to overturn a recent Dublin High Court ruling that bans returns to the UK as it is not considered a "safe country". But the British Prime Minister assures that the UK is "not interested" in negotiating on this issue with the Celtic Tiger. "We're not going to accept returns from the EU through Ireland when the EU won't accept returns to France, where illegal immigrants come from," he told ITV. "Of course we're not going to do that," he added forcefully.  The row coincides with the run-up to England' s local elections on Thursday. And it has become the best campaign for the Conservative Party who, despite the setback predicted by the polls, now boasts that the Brexit has finally regained control of the borders, aware that immigration is one of the issues that most concerns the electorate.  After years of legal battles, last week Westminster finally passed a law whereby anyone "illegally entering the UK" after January 1, 2022 will be sent all the way to Rwanda to have their applications processed there. If successful, they could be granted refugee status and allowed to stay in the African country. Otherwise, they could apply to settle in Rwanda for other reasons or seek asylum in another "safe third country." What they would not be able to do is apply to return to the UK. The Executive argues that the plan will deter people from crossing the English Channel in small boats.  Although the opposition and NGOs consider it "inhumane" and the leading representatives of the Church of England, 23 bishops who sit in the House of Lords, have even described it as a practice "that should shame us as a nation".  Be that as it may, London has now passed the problem on to Ireland. Following the British exit from the bloc, the border between the Republic of Ireland and the British province of Northern Ireland is the only physical border - along with Gibraltar - now remaining between the UK and the EU. And to enforce the 1998 Good Friday Agreement-which sealed the peace between Catholics and Protestants in Ulster-that border, despite Brexit, cannot have physical checks on people.  The land division between the two countries is inappreciable. One only knows whether one is on the British or Irish side if, on the stretches of narrow country roads, one sees the road signs in miles or kilometers. Regulating that border was one of the main stumbling blocks of the historic divorce. And despite the Windsor Framework, it is clear that the problems will continue.  The Irish High Court ruled last month that the UK was no longer a safe "third country" to return asylum seekers to, due to Rwanda's controversial migration plan.  However, the Irish Executive is now preparing legislation to deal with the return to the UK of migrants arriving in the UK across the invisible border with Northern Ireland. The Irish Prime Minister, the Christian Democrat Simon Harris, has assured that the British legislation to send irregular migrants to the African country is having an impact on his country due to the "fear" generated by this measure and has reiterated that he has no intention of allowing Ireland to "provide a loophole for the migratory challenges of others".  However, Downing Street has made it clear that even if Ireland passes new legislation,"it is up to the UK government to decide who we do and do not accept into the country." "It is up to the UK government to decide who we do and do not accept into the country."  British Minister for Northern Ireland Chris Heaton-Harris said Monday that London will only deal "with the European Union as a whole" with any request from Dublin to return undocumented migrants arriving on its territory from the British province. After meeting with Irish Deputy Prime Minister Micheál Martin on the sidelines of the British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference (BIIGC) on bilateral cooperation, he argued that the controversial migration plan "is already working as a deterrent tool."  The UK government is paying £500 million to fund more border patrols to prevent boat crossings and a new detention center in France, following a new agreement between the two countries in 2022. However, since Brexit there has been no specific pact allowing London to return asylum seekers to Paris once they have crossed the English Channel.  After passing the controversial law, the Conservative government said that the first flights to the African country would be in July. However, without warning, an operation to detain asylum seekers has already begun this week. Those who attend routine meetings at immigration service offices or bail appointments will be held in preparation for deportation.  The Executive is seeking the coup for Thursday's local elections, where the Tories could lose half the seats they now hold. But lawyers and activists warn that the arrests risk provoking protracted legal battles, community protests and clashes with police.   According to the latest official data, the number of people arriving on British shores in small boats in the first four months of 2024 was the highest ever recorded for that period, at 7,167 people, compared with 5,745 in the same period last year. The previous record for those four months was 6,691.  'Premier' Rishi Sunak should not now be interested in a diplomatic crisis with Ireland. One of the main achievements of his mandate was precisely to seal a new pact with the neighboring country to unblock years of tensions due to the problems caused by the Brexit. But politics is fickle and it turns out that the new London-Dublin standoff has now become Downing Street's best campaign because it means that its controversial law to deport asylum seekers to Rwanda is working. Or so at least that's what the 'Tory' leader says.  Load-Date: May 2, 2024  End of Document
