   Northern Ireland's first republican government and the consequences of Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English February 2, 2024 Friday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 893 words Body   A historic milestone is due to take place this weekend in Northern Ireland. Michelle O'Neill, leader of Northern Irish Sinn Féin, is due to take office as First Minister of the constituent nation of the United Kingdom. It will be the first time that a leader of the republican and nationalist party has held the post. This will be possible after a turnaround in local politics and is a direct consequence of the Brexit vote. The 2016 Brexit vote created an almost insoluble problem on the island of Ireland and is particularly sensitive on the island. By the Good Friday peace of 1998, the island's internal border was effectively abolished, with free transit between the Republic of Ireland, an EU member state, and Northern Ireland. Various studies and samples have shown that the transit of people and goods has reduced episodes of violence. Brexit, however, would restore the border, creating an impasse. The solution was to "move" the border to the sea. Products from the EU entering UK territory via Ireland would have to pass through customs controls at ports on the Irish Sea. This solution, in turn, has displeased unionists, both in Northern Ireland and in some English sectors, who see an internal rift that is still the EU's "fault". Shortly after Brexit and in the midst of the various agreements and negotiations, episodes of violence on the island increased. In fact, all of Northern Ireland's border districts voted to remain in the EU. The crisis generated by Brexit caused support for Sinn Féin to reach all-time highs and in May 2022, the republican, Catholic and nationalist party came first in the local elections for the first time. Politics in Northern Ireland In this context, "nationalist" means advocating the union of the island of Ireland into a single sovereign and republican state, without British influence or the British monarchy. Sinn Féin is a left-wing party with historical ties to the Irish Republican Army, the IRA, a group considered terrorist by the London government, among others. In other words, British anti-EU nationalism strengthened Irish pro-republic nationalism. As a consequence of Sinn Féin's victory, the Democratic Unionist Party, known as the DUP, the pro-UK Protestant party, put the brakes on talks to form a government and obstructed Michelle O'Neill's inauguration for almost two years. Normally, all parties in Northern Ireland form a coalition government to maintain a viable administration, with the party with the most votes appointing the First Minister. Since the arrangement was created with the peace of 1998, all prime ministers have been from pro-London Conservative and Unionist parties, either the Ulster Unionist Party or the DUP. Officially, the reason for the Unionist obstruction was dissatisfaction with the post-Brexit agreement. In reality, however, preventing Sinn Féin from taking office at a delicate time was part of the calculation. The point is that the Conservative Unionists want to reconcile two contradictory things. At the same time, they want an open border within the island of Ireland, without being part of the European Union, and also without the inspection of products from within the United Kingdom. Leaving the EU would imply a border, and it needs to be placed somewhere. Either at the de facto international border, ending the peace agreement, or at sea. Unionists now say they are satisfied with a new deal with London. The new agreement will inject three billion pounds sterling into Northern Ireland, will eliminate routine checks on goods from the island of Great Britain destined to remain in Northern Ireland and strengthens the power of the Northern Irish assembly to protest against what it sees as possible overreach. Nationalists and reunification The new text also reaffirms Northern Ireland as a constituent kingdom of the United Kingdom, an attempt to put some sense of indivisibility on paper in the face of growing support for republican nationalism caused by Brexit. While in the 1990s popular support in Northern Ireland for reunification was no more than 40%, today public opinion on the issue is split down the middle. The agreement, which is a modification of the previous Windsor Framework Convention, also displeased the most extreme unionists, a noisy minority. Michelle O'Neill's swearing-in ceremony is sure to attract a lot of commotion and symbolism on one side and protests and complaints on the other. The Republican leader's main agenda, however, is still a long way off. O'Neill avoids the term Northern Ireland. She prefers to use "the north of Ireland", reducing it to a mere geographical reference to the island, a provocation to the idea of partition. The possibility of a unification referendum, however, is distant. No British government would commit to it in the short term, it would be political suicide, and the act needs to be proposed by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, a post controlled by London. The same situation cannot be maintained after, say, ten years of republican and nationalist governments. The O'Neill government could be just the first. In the science fiction series Star Trek: The Next Generation, set in the future, one of the characters in an episode refers to the "Irish unification of 2024". This has become a symbol of the nationalist and republican cause. It may not be a prophecy, but it almost is. Load-Date: February 3, 2024  End of Document
