   Only 10 percent of Britons believe Brexit has been positive for their economy CE Noticias Financieras English December 30, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 333 words Body   Only one in ten Britons believe that the UK's exit from the EU has been positive for their personal economy, a perception that extends to key issues such as the country's overall economy, immigration control or inflation, according to a survey. Forty-nine percent believe it has been detrimental to the UK in Genera and 22 percent believe it has been positive.     The survey published by 'The Observer' highlights that 35 percent of Britons believe that the Brexit has had a negative impact on their personal finances.  Fifty-five percent believe it has been negative for the country's economy in general (12 percent believe it has been favorable) and 48 percent believe it has been negative for the public health system (9 percent believe it has been positive).     Opinium's survey of more than 2,000 interviews also highlights that 31 percent believe Brexit has been negative for the environment (12 percent believe it has been good) and 40 percent believe it has been detrimental for wages (11 percent believe it has been positive).     Fifty-two percent believe it has been bad for the UK's ability to control immigration, one of the star arguments of the Brexit campaign, and an overwhelming 63 percent believe it has been bad for the cost of living (7 percent believe it has been good).     The Brexit campaign argued that it would be a boost to the economy and trade and that it would recover £350,000 a week for the National Health Service (NHS). They also promised to bring back immigration and border control.     "Discontent about how the government has managed Brexit continues with perceived failures even in areas previously seen as potentially beneficial," explained Opinium's head of policy and public affairs, James Crouch, referring to immibration.     "This puts even more pressure on the government in this area. Nevertheless, Brexit is likely to be a secondary issue at the next election compared to the state of the economy and the NHS, a clear priority for voters," he said. Load-Date: December 31, 2023  End of Document
