   Only independence offers route back to EU and away from costly folly of Brexit The Courier February 1, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 26 Length: 756 words Byline: Stuart Nicolson Body   Exactly four years ago, the UK finally left the European Union after years of political turmoil sparked by the result of the 2016 referendum. I marked the moment in Dublin, arriving in the Irish capital the very night that Brexit was about to take effect, just a few hours before the midnight deadline. The timing of the trip was a complete coincidence, but in its own small way it seemed somehow appropriate and symbolic to be flying out of Scotland while it was still part of the EU, only to return a couple of days later when everything may have appeared the same but underneath a massive change had taken place. Four years on, and it's worth asking where the supposed benefits of Brexit are. The anniversary coincides with the imposition of a new set of rules on food imports to the UK from the EU. The regulations, which have already been postponed five times, come into effect from today, and will see a massive rise in the need for form-filling from those involved in the sector. So what, some might say. Except, the changes will hit everyone because the knock-on effects are expected to push up food prices here. The impact is also likely to see smaller producers across the EU decide not to bother exporting their goods to the UK because of the additional costs and administration involved. Similar rules already in place for the last three years on goods going from the UK into the EU have seen almost a million health certificates having to be signed off by vets, meaning the food and farming sector here has had to generate billions of pounds in extra sales to try to cover the costs. There are also fears that when this week's import rules actually take effect they will inevitably see delays in supply chains which depend on rapid, free-flowing movement to ensure perishable goods reach the supermarket shelves in time. So, the food we are able to buy will be more expensive, while there may also be less selection. "Higher bills, less choice" wasn't a campaign slogan chosen by Brexiteers, but it turns out it would have been an honest one. The impact of these new food import and export rules isn't just some niche concern - it goes right to the heart of the reality of what Brexit entails. Leaving the EU, we were told, would see a slashing of "red tape", although if you asked any of those promoting it at the time of the referendum or since to give a single example of an actual piece of EU regulation or European law that they would repeal, they are often stuck for words. Instead, as the new rules on food imports coming into effect show, far from cutting down the need for rules and regulations, leaving the EU has actually increased them. And you don't have to be a farmer or food producer to experience that. Just try sending a simple package by post to an EU country. What used to be a simple task of sticking a stamp on an envelope or parcel is now a faintly ludicrous exercise in form-filling, with a full customs declaration required. Maybe the deepest irony is that Brexit was something achieved largely on the back of fears being fuelled about immigration, but this week has seen predictions that inward migration will see the UK population edge past 70 million a decade earlier than previously expected. The wider economic impact of Brexit is impossible to ignore. Former Bank of England governor Mark Carney's observation that at the time of the Brexit vote in 2016, the UK's economy was almost 90% the size of Germany's while now it is barely 70% has been disputed, but there is plenty of other evidence to support such claims. One of the most recent studies suggests that leaving the EU and single market has cost the UK around £140 billion, with the average UK citizen was £2,000 a year worse off in 2023 as a result. You don't have to love Brussels and all it entails to believe that being part of the EU is, overall, a good thing. More than anything else, the way that Brexit has denied a whole generation of younger people the opportunity to live and work across the whole continent is something that is profoundly felt by many of them, and is just one reason why - if there was a rerun of the vote - the UK would almost certainly choose to rejoin the EU. Under Keir Starmer's Labour there is zero chance of such a vote being offered. For Scotland, it is clear that only EU membership in its own right offers a way back - something that may yet prove to be a decisive issue in the debate on the country's future. 'Higher bills, less choice' wasn't a campaign slogan chosen by Brexiteers, but it would have been an honest one Graphic    SHELF LIFE: There are fears that when import rules come into effect they will see delays in supply chains which depend on rapid, free-flowing movement to ensure perishable goods reach the supermarket shelves in time. Load-Date: February 1, 2024  End of Document
