   Port of Santander will receive €56.4 mln in EU aid to adapt to Brexit PortSEurope January 09, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright © 2024 PortSEurope All Rights Reserved  Length: 410 words Body    Santander, Spain (Ports Europe) January 9, 2024 - The Port of Santander will receive 56.4 million euros in European aid to adapt to Brexit. The funds, managed by the Ministry of Finance and Public Administration, will serve to support the investment effort and operating expenses that the Port Authority has had to face to adapt its UK traffic after Brexit.  “We have had to face large investments and operating expenses to adapt, in conditions of safety, competitiveness and sustainability, to the new circumstances of traffic that depends on a country that is the main commercial partner of our port,” said president of the Port Authority of Santander, César Díaz.  Brexit port projects in Santander   Adaptation of the ferry terminal operated by Brittany Ferries. ctions to prevent intrusion on ships destined for the UK. This includes the installation of electronic surveillance and control systems for merchandise; security closures; or hiring private security. easures regarding customs control and passengers originating in the UK such as the construction of a customs control post; provisional facilities for the execution of border controls, customs controls and para-customs controls; definitive customs control facilities at the North Bank dock; or the construction of a new temporary building for border inspections. apacity compensation actions at the central Raos breakwater after dedicating port spaces to the needs of Brexit. Among them, the completion works on the Raos 9 Pier, a ramp for road traffic on Raos 7-8 or the first phase of the car storage silo. einforcement of the port police workforce   Commercial relationship with Santander and the UK  The UK is the main trading partner of the Port of Santander, accounting for 20% of its total traffic and 34% of export traffic. By type of merchandise, the most prominent traffic is Ro-Ro (45%), followed by cement (36%) and automobiles (11%).  Furthermore, the economic impact on the APS's income from traffic with the UK is around 23% of the total income from taxes and fees applied to ship calls.  Brexit Adaptation Fund  This EU fund aims to support to Member States, regions and sectors most affected by the adverse consequences of the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the European Union (Brexit); and, in particular, contributes to specific measures put in place by Member States to help businesses and economic sectors, workers, regions and local communities that have suffered the impact of Brexit. Load-Date: January 9, 2024  End of Document
