   Post-Brexit problems with online shopping continue, says report Belfast Telegraph January 22, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 20 Length: 357 words Byline: Flávia Gouveia Body   CONSUMERS here are still concerned about the impact of Brexit on online shopping, a report from the NI Consumer Council has found. It's part of research by the watchdog carried over the last three years to monitor the impact of Brexit on NI consumers. The report followed a survey of more than 1,000 participants who were asked a range of questions including food availability and affordability, travel and energy. As with previous years, the main concerns for 2021 reported by participants were the NI economy, price increases and maintaining a frictionless border with the Republic. It said rising prices was the main area of concern, with a growing number of people saying that they "will be unable to absorb further price rises". Only 17% of consumers reported being able to absorb price increases, compared to 22% the previous year and 27% in 2021. Of those surveyed, 76% attributed rising food costs to Brexit, while nearly 70% attributed rising energy prices to it. A growing number of consumers also reported concerns about how Brexit had negatively impacted their online shopping. More than half said the costs of online shopping was a concern, while 66% - compared to 55% in 2021 - were concerned about the reduced availability and supply of products online. Retailers not delivering to NI was the top concern reported, with a quarter of consumers saying they had experienced this first-hand. But the Consumer Council said this was a significant drop from the previous year, when nearly 80% had said they had experienced this issue. The report said: "Great Britain (GB) online marketplaces are hugely important to NI consumers with approximately nine out of 10 (94%) consumers shopping online, with our research showing that three-quarters (75%) of online shopping is being purchased from GB retailers." The report also found that cross-border shopping habits have not changed, with the number of consumers travelling for their shopping remaining consistent. Over half of consumers said they travel to the Republic for food and drink, and while 53% said they chose to buy their petrol or diesel there, this was down from 75% in the previous year. Load-Date: January 22, 2024  End of Document
