   Post-Brexit checks removed in NI deal; agreement set to restore powersharing at stormont The Journal (Newcastle, UK) February 1, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 474 words Body   ROUTINE post-Brexit checks on goods shipped from Great Britain to final destinations in Northern Ireland are to be removed as part of a Government deal to restore powersharing at Stormont. A command paper titled "Safeguarding The Union" commits to replacing the current green lane process, which requires percentages of goods to be checked as they arrive from Great Britain, with a "UK internal market system" that will govern the movement of goods that will remain within the United Kingdom. DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson has hailed the move as a key concession that will effectively scrap the contentious so-called Irish Sea border for goods destined to remain within the UK. "There should not be a border within the UK internal market. These proposals remove that border," he said. The measure is part of a wide-ranging deal agreed between the DUP and the Government that is set to bring about the restoration of devolved government in Northern Ireland after a two-year hiatus. Prime Minister Rishi Sunak said restored powersharing in Northern Ireland offered the prospect of a "brighter future". Mr Sunak told the Commons: "After two years without an executive, there is now a prospect of powersharing back up and running, strengthening our Union, giving people the local, accountable government that they need, and offering a brighter future for Northern Ireland." The DUP has agreed to drop its twoyear blockade of Stormont in exchange for the Government measures aimed at addressing its concerns about post-Brexit trading arrangements that created economic barriers between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK. The Stormont Assembly could sit again as soon as Saturday. The post-Brexit red lane for transporting goods from GB to NI and on into the EU Single Market will remain, but the command paper offers measures aimed at reducing the volume of trade required to use that red-tape heavy route, with a prediction that 80% of goods will now move free of routine checks through the internal market system. The move to reduce post-Brexit checks on GB-NI trade would represent a change to the current EU/UK Windsor Framework agreement and therefore would require Brussels approval. It is understood the EU has been kept up to date with the shape of the Government's package of measures. Downing Street has said that the deal contains "significant" changes to the Windsor Framework's "operation", but is not about altering the "fundamentals" of the framework. The formal implementation of any changes to the framework are expected to be examined and decided upon within the existing EU/UK Joint Committee framework in the weeks ahead. As well as moves to cut Brexit bureaucracy on Irish Sea trade, the command paper includes a series of measures aimed at providing assurances around Northern Ireland's constitutional position within the United Kingdom. Graphic    Sir Jeffrey Donaldson of the DUP CHARLES MCQUILLAN/ GETTY IMAGES Load-Date: February 1, 2024  End of Document
