   Revealed: Woman, 25, arrested for throwing milkshake over Nigel Farage because she 'just felt like it' is a Jeremy Corbyn-loving OnlyFans model from a family of 'appalled' staunch Brexiteers - as Reform UK leader says incident was 'quite frightening' MailOnline June 4, 2024 Tuesday 5:38 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:3 Length: 1778 words Byline: Eirian Jane Prosser Andrew Young Emily Jane Davies James Tapsfield Body   The woman who hurled a milkshake over Nigel Farage as he launched his campaign to become an MP is a Jeremy Corbyn-supporting OnlyFans model who hails from a family of Brexiteers, MailOnline can reveal. Victoria Thomas-Bowen, 25, was arrested by police on suspicion of assault after she drenched the new Reform leader as he stepped out of a Wetherspoons in Clacton, Essex. She has since used the stunt to try and bring viewers to her 'explicit XXX' content page, posting a photo of herself scantily clad alongside the link and the lyrics 'my milkshake brings all the boys to the yard'. Dramatic pictures show how the mother-of-one dodged Mr Farage's burly minders before flinging the contents of a McDonald's cup towards him. It caught him full in the face. Mr Farage, who previously dubbed Clacton the 'most patriotic' town in Britain, merely wiped his eyes and continued. Speaking from his home in nearby Jaywick, her Brexit-voting brother Paul told MailOnline: 'I have just seen it, and to be honest, I'm appalled. I don't know where she is. I don't want anything to do with her.' Despite posting a video on X with the caption 'my milkshake brings all the people to the rally' in reference to the 2003 song Milkshake, Farage admitted it was 'quite frightening'.  The incident has led to wide condemnation from MPs all across the political spectrum including Labour's Yvette Cooper who called it a 'disgrace' and 'completely unacceptable and wrong'. But Thomas-Bowen, who films her x-rated video clips in the spare bedroom of her mother's £260,000 house in Grays, told the BBC she flung the banana milkshake because she 'just felt like it'. 'He doesn't stand for me', the self-described 'petite blonde pocket rocket' added. 'He doesn't represent anything I believe in, or any of the people around here. He doesn't represent us, he's not from here.' She has since posted support for her actions on her social media - who said they 'could not be more proud' of her. She then posted a photo of herself dressed only in her underwear and sports socks in a provocative pose, alongside a link to her Onlyfans website and the lyrics to the song Milkshake. Thomas-Bowen previously voiced her support for Jeremy Corbyn on Facebook and called for Britons to boycott the late Queen's Diamond Jubilee. Last November, the model flew out to Istanbul for a nose job. She told her subscribers she underwent the procedure to make her nose 'smaller' and 'prettier'. Posting pictures of her recovery - and showing off the difference before and after - Thomas-Bowen said she loved her new nose 'so much' and was already breathing better. Reacting to the incident, the Reform UK leader told ITV: 'I don't know what was thrown at me but it hit me in the face fair and square. Quite frightening.' He went on to say he thinks he keeps having the dairy drink thrown at him because he goes 'out to meet the public and nobody else does'. The incident has echoes of 2019, when he fell victim to a similar stunt in Newcastle. Home Secretary James Cleverly led condemnation of the attack, saying it was 'unacceptable' against any politician. Reform allies branded the assailant a 'juvenile moron' and said it would only boost their support. It came after the Brexit champion told a huge crowd of local voters the Tories had 'betrayed' their trust and warned Rishi Sunak would pay a 'big price' at the general election on 4 July. Shouts from the crowd included 'get 'em Nige' and 'we love you Nigel' as huge numbers of Mr Farage's supporters gathered near Clacton pier. Mr Farage's campaign launch in the Essex seat came after he yesterday performed a stunning U-turn on his previous decision not to stand for Parliament. The 60-year-old has made a dramatic return to the political frontline and also been installed as Reform UK leader in place of Richard Tice. In 2019 Mr Farage was hit with a banana milkshake while banging the drum for the Brexit Party. His assailant was later ordered to carry out community work and pay £350 in compensation.  Thomas-Bowen told reporters afterwards: 'He doesn't stand for me, he doesn't represent anything I believe in, or any of the people around here.'  An Essex Police statement said: 'Officers have made two arrests after responding to a report a drink was thrown at a man in Clacton. 'We were called to the area of Marine Parade East, Clacton, at around 2.10pm today... 'A 25-year-old woman, from Clacton, was arrested at the scene on suspicion of assault. 'While officers were responding and making this arrest, a second individual, a man, was arrested on suspicion of assaulting an emergency worker. 'Both individuals remain in custody for questioning.' Richard Tice, Mr Farage's predecessor as Reform UK leader, said: 'The juvenile moron who threw a drink over Nigel has just gained us hundreds of thousands more votes. 'We will not be bullied or threatened off the campaign trail.' Mr Farage's campaign in Clacton - a constituency once held by Ukip when he was the party's leader - will be his eighth attempt to enter Westminster. He will need to overturn a 31,000 Conservative majority from the last election with only minor boundary changes in the seat. However, Tories have been sounding gloomy about their prospects and pollsters believe Mr Farage is in with a strong chance. Grumbling has been surfacing about Rishi Sunak's failure to head off the threat of Mr Farage standing, with suggestions he should have been given a peerage before. The developments have heaped more pressure on Mr Sunak ahead of a head-to-head debate tonight where he is seen as having to land blows on Keir Starmer. More polls today have shown Labour on track for a massive landslide on July 4.  As he launched his campaign at the Moon and Starfish this afternoon, Mr Farage made reference to the town's past support for Ukip when it elected Tory defector Douglas Carswell as the local MP. He said: 'Without Clacton, Brexit would not have happened - so thank you Clacton!' Mr Farage vowed to be a 'bloody nuisance' in the House of Commons should he be elected in a month's time. Speaking at the rally in Clacton, Mr Farage said the Tories deserved to be punished for their 'betrayal' over Brexit. The Reform UK leader said: 'We made an offer to the British people, we could get back our independence and control of our borders. 'But what has happened? The Conservatives have betrayed that trust. They've opened up the borders to mass immigration like we've never seen before. 'And they deserve to pay a price for that, a big price for that.' Mr Farage earlier called for the UK to have 'zero' net migration and defended controversial comments about Muslims. The newly-installed Reform UK leader, who has sent Conservatives panicking with his return to the political frontline, said immigration had 'exploded' in recent years. The Brexiteer insisted certain sectors of the economy would have to put up with shortages in a bid to reduce the number of arrivals into the country. Mr Farage claimed this would drive up wages and 'encourage people to learn skills rather than heading off to university and doing social sciences'. He also risked stirring up a fresh row this morning in a fiery clash with BBC Radio 4 Today presenter Mishal Husain. Mr Farage doubled down on his view that a growing number of British Muslims 'do not subscribe to British values', which has been branded 'ignorant and offensive'. He also defended claims that there are some streets in Britain where 'no one speaks English'. Challenged about his remarks, Mr Farage replied: 'I could take you streets in Oldham right now where no one speaks English.'  But he declined to comment on whether his own children spoke a second language, when asked how he knew people in Oldham were not multilingual. The 60-year-old has vowed to lead a 'political revolt' against the Tories and Labour after his bombshell announcement that he will lead Reform for the next five years. In a round of interviews today, Mr Farage launched a direct attack on the Tories over immigration numbers and firmly ruled out a pact with Rishi Sunak's party.  He told the BBC: 'We have been betrayed by a Conservative Party that I gave considerable help to in 2019. 'We were told that we would get control of our borders, we were told the immigration numbers would come down, they have exploded. 'I feel betrayed by them, millions of voters feel betrayed by them.' Mr Farage claimed the Tories were 'well past their sell-by-date, the brand is ruined, they've lost the election already'. He added: 'We cannot go on as we are - we have to limit numbers. 'Our lives, our quality of life in this country, is being diminished by the population explosion. 'And if that means that in some sectors there'd be shortages, what that then means is wages will go up and we'd start to encourage people to learn skills rather than heading off to university and doing social sciences.' Mr Farage stated his aim was to have 'net migration at zero', which would allow 'room within the labour market for up to 600,000 people' to come to Britain each year. Latest estimates from the Office for National Statistics suggested that 1.2 million people migrated into the UK last year and 532,000 people emigrated from it. This left a net migration figure of 685,000 for 2023. In a later interview, Mr Farage suggested his long-term aim was to effectively take over the Conservative Party. He told ITV's Good Morning Britain he could not stand for or seek to lead the Conservative Party 'as they currently are'. But he added: 'You can speculate as to what'll happen in three or four years' time, all I will tell you is if Reform succeed in the way that I think they can, then a chunk of the Conservative Party will join us - it's the other way around.' He pointed to Canada, where 'Reform did a reverse takeover of the Conservative Party, rebranded it and Stephen Harper - who was elected as a Reform MP - became the Canadian prime minister for 10 years'. He said: 'I don't want to join the Conservative Party, I think the better thing to do would be to take it over.' Mr Farage last night used an op-ed for The Telegraph to argue that Britons are 'furious' at how both Labour and the Conservatives have approached immigration. He added there is also 'deep anger' at the rate at which public services are 'disintegrating'. Home Secretary James Cleverly this morning sought to play down the impact of Mr Farage's decision to stand in the election. 'The last time I heard him make reference to Clacton, he was saying that he didn't want to spend every Friday in Clacton,' the Cabinet minister told Sky News. 'Reform has always been a vehicle for Nigel Farage's self-promotion, I think Richard Tice is now discovering that rather painfully.' Load-Date: June 5, 2024  End of Document
