   RISHI URGED: TIME TO TALK UP BREXIT; EXCLUSIVE PM URGED TO PUSH POSITIVITY The Express July 8, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 1,4,5 Length: 1024 words Byline: David Maddox Body   RISHI Sunak has been urged to remember what won the Tories an 80-seat victory - and "to start talking up Britain and Brexit" again. A series of his MPs warned that the Prime Minister must move on from "the gloom and doom" agenda of Remainers and his Labour opponents. Brendan Clarke-Smith, one of the Tories to break down Labour's Red Wall, said: "We have got to remember what won us an enormous majority in 2019. "We are the party of Brexit and opportunity. We are positive about this country's achievements TURN TO PAGE 4 FROM PAGE ONE and its potential especially with Brexit. We have to start talking up Brexit and Britain again and not just accept the gloom and doom narrative of the Lefty Remainers." A survey by Redfield & Wilton Strategies found that 41 per cent of voters think Labour's Brexit policy is to rejoin the EU, although Sir Keir Starmer has said repeatedly he would not. With two polls showing the Tories heading for an election disaster with potentially fewer than 100 seats, many of the party's MPs say failure to properly deliver the benefits of Brexit is a root cause. In a Techne UK tracker poll for the Daily Express, only a third of 2016 Leave voters (34 per cent) would back the Tories - while 44 per cent who backed the party in 2019 have abandoned them. Former Brexit minister David Jones was blunt in his assessment of the Government's failure to make a positive case for Brexit. Writing for the Express today, the deputy chairman of the European Research Group of Tory MPs warns that Europhiles are "blaming Brexit for all the ills of the world and urging us to return to the orbit of Brussels. "The Remainers' plan, no doubt, is to keeping pumping out this gloomy narrative." But he listed a string of successes including the vaccine rollout, leadership over Ukraine and trade deals, adding: "I'm proud of Brexit and don't share the despondent message the Rejoiners are putting about. I know that Government ministers feel the same way, too. I just wish they'd say so more often." eel hey'd erstood experixiteers It is understood that Mr Sunak is also being urged to move experienced Brexiteers into his Cabinet in a reshuffle this month. fle me One name being suggested "to help turn around the narrative" is former Trade Secretary Dr Liam Fox. A WhatsApp group of Tory MPs has been set up to help push a more positive approach to the state of the UK and Brexit successes. ade hatsApp een ive chne oints In the Techne UK poll, the Tories were 21 points behind Labour.At a ection general election that would leave them with just 84 seats. A YouGov poll yesterday showed them 25 points adrift. rday ft. posi- Dr Fox has urged the PM to be positive again. He said: "Since 2016 [the year of the EU 16 he be referendum] cumulative growth in Italy has been four per cent, in Germany it has been 5.5 per cent, in the UK it has been 6.8 per cent. h la we Brexi e "In May last year, British exports to the EU were not just the highest since Brexit but since records began.The eurozone is currently in recession, we are not. "Is it not time we heard more good news talking Britain up?" ta As Aspirational M histori Toth Red Wall MPs fighting to retain historic gains made by the Tories in 2019 backed the call. Marco Longhi said his party needs to put the positive case for leaving the EU. htl The Dudley North MP added: "Any narrative that talks down an economy will have consequences. Sometimes it feels like some people want things to fail if you listen to their doom and gloom." Mr Longhi is trade envoy to Brazil.The UK struck a deal with it to do more business with one of the world's fastest-growing economies. He said: "The country voted for a positive aspirational, outward looking Great Britain when it voted for Brexit. Global Britain, unleashed from the shackles of the EU...now has a fantastic opportunity to motor ahead and lead the way in so many sectors delivering many more jobs and job security." Stoke North MP Jonathan Gullis warned that some Remainers see a chance to take the UK back into the bloc if the Government does not start being positive again. He said: "The Government needs to continue delivering on the huge benefits of Brexit. "But Brexit wasn't just about economics. We have restored our sovereignty so that we can control our laws and borders, giving power back to the British people rather than bureaucrats in Brussels." Ex-Brexit opportunities minister Jacob Rees-Mogg said: "We need to cut prices by deregulating. Brexit means we could import cheaper brands from America and abolish food tariffs to make the weekly shopping basket cheaper. Such Brexit-enabled policies would help deal with the cost-of-living crisis. "We could also cut high-cost business and employment regulations to boost the economy. "Brexit is an enabler: it is for the Government to act." The City of London Corporation says Brexit has been a huge success for financial services despite gloomy predictions. Chris Hayward, its policy chairman, claimed that there are now "thousands of extra jobs" in the City as a result of Brexit. He said that Alberta Investment Management Company, Canada's largest asset managers, announced plans to more than double its headcount in London. Gateway Bosses aim to invest billions in the UK, and they hailed the capital as a better gateway to Asia and Europe than New York is. The massive Australian superannuation fundAware Super is among other large global investors making similar moves. A Downing Street spokeswoman insisted that the Prime Minister - who supported Leave in the 2016 referendum - has been talking about the benefits of Brexit and putting them into action. She said last night: "Just look at the [NHS] Long Term Workforce plan and some of the reform agenda in it. "If we hadn't left the EU, we wouldn't have been able to change nurse training from five years to four years [because of EU rules]." The spokeswoman continued: "The Prime Minister was talking that up at the press conference last week. The Retained EU Law Bill [allowing the UK to get rid of EU regulations] was passed without any rebellion." She also pointed out that the Prime Minister had championed the creation of freeports. OPINION: PAGE 14 Graphic    Pictures: ANTHONY DEVLIN/RINDOFF PETROFF/GETTY; PA'Be positive'... Rishi Sunak e'... ak Load-Date: July 8, 2023  End of Document
