   Sadiq Khan's Brexit claims are just hot air The Evening Standard (London) January 23, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Evening Standard Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 553 words Byline: Anne McElvoy Body   THE point of a big city mayor can often be to say things that national politicians have put into the "too difficult" drawer. Moving them into the reality box is another matter. In his run-up to the London elections in May, Sadiq Khan has returned to the "Brexit isn't working" theme. A speech at the weekend tilting at Sir Keir Starmer's "omerta" on discussing remedies for Brexit - or even the fullfat dream of re-joining - hit the Bregret buttons. The bald truth, however, is what the London Mayor says about the EU matters about as much as what the mayor of Berlin or Paris says about London. Added to which, Rejoiners flocking to Khan's proposals should be wary. They may fall into a mirror image of the trap into which Brexiteers hurtled when they claimed that cutting ties with the trade partner and land mass next door would be a simple matter. It was not - and neither is re-attachment. I don't really know if Britain will re-join the EU in its present form. The EU is changing - more fraught and fissiparous, less keen on migration - and will remain resistant to overtures from the UK, other than alleviating trade frictions or residency rights, where both parties benefit in clear financial terms. The present habit of extrapolating from polls showing a will to rejoin the EU also skews the argument because they do not factor in the inevitably high cost of any such measure - and the renewed splits that would open up in any negotiation. So the idea of "meaningful realignment", as Khan put it, is a hiding to nowhere. And even if there were any reciprocal desire for such an arrangement, try drawing it up. Khan is arguing that London should be able to waive national agreements because it is special in vague way. But why not Manchester, Birmingham or Leeds? A "youth mobility" proposal, which suggests that after a certain age we would be consigned back to the existing onerous arrangements, sounds like a route to age discrimination challenges. Sorting out the cut-off age would not be fun and on a small point of international diplomacy, cities cannot negoti- ate with countries, and neither could the urban authorities waive immigration law. Naturally, a lot of us in the capital would love to get rid of the infuriating Brexit-induced travel hurdles. It might well be that a Starmer government can aim to take the edge off the tensions which led to this situation. There is still an underlying distrust of Remain, urban elites. Many who believe in the cause prefer not to heed this or assume will simply disappear. Sir Keir acknowledges this awkward fact and Khan, in essence, does not. He has a supportive Remain base in London while the Labour leader needs to scrap it out on the more difficult terrain in a general election. Sir Keir must also show that he might have learned something about what drove the Brexit result and caution in assuming that it can simply be overridden. The consequences of the referendum have indeed been a stew of wishful thinking, chaotic implementation and denial about the impacts of leaving the EU. All the more to be sceptical of those who arrive with a glib solution. When it comes to Brexit, there's no quick fix. ? Anne McElvoy hosts the Power Play podcast for Politico There is still a distrust of Remain, urban elites - many who believe in the cause prefer not to heed this Load-Date: January 23, 2024  End of Document
