   Sadiq Khan warns post-Brexit border checks will cause Eurostar chaos standard.co.uk February 10, 2024 Saturday 8:53 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Evening Standard Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS,NEWS; Version:1 Length: 350 words Byline: Sophie Wingate Highlight: The London mayor urged the Government to take steps to reduce potential disruption caused by new biometric border controls. Body   Sadiq Khan  has urged ministers to prevent “chaos” for Eurostar  passengers when the European Union launches biometric border checks later this year. The Mayor  of London  said the Government  should not “wash its hands” of issues around post-Brexit red tape, after warnings that the UK was not properly planning for the new EU biometric Entry/Exit System (EES). High Speed 1, which runs UK rail services and operates the line between London and the Channel Tunnel, said preparations were “severely inadequate” and could lead to massive queues and the potential capping of passenger numbers. These new post-Brexit checks will cause chaos at St Pancras, with cuts to services and potentially huge queues facing passengers at peak times Sadiq Khan HS1 told MPs last month that the decision not to enable online pre-registration would “put enormous pressure on infrastructure at St Pancras International”. The new EES checks, which are expected to begin in October, will require travellers from countries outside the EU to register biometrics such as facial and fingerprint scans at their first point of entry. Mr Khan warned that delays or cuts to services would harm London’s leisure and retail industries, particularly in the busy run-up to Christmas. He called on ministers to support HS1 and Eurostar in urgently resolving these issues. The Labour mayor said: “The success of the Eurostar is a vital part of London’s and the UK’s economic success – with St Pancras a gateway for huge numbers of tourists and businesspeople in the country. “As it stands these new post-Brexit checks will cause chaos at St Pancras, with cuts to services and potentially huge queues facing passengers at peak times. This is directly a result of Brexit, and it’s not an issue ministers can now wash their hands of. “With London’s economy roaring back after the pandemic, this sends a terrible signal to both tourists and businesses from around the world. “Ministers now need to offer HS1 and Eurostar all the support it needs to resolve these issues as a matter of urgency. Cuts to services and longer delays simply isn’t an option.” Load-Date: February 10, 2024  End of Document
