   Seven years on, Brexit puzzle grows The Business Times Singapore June 22, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 SPH Media Holdings Pte. Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: OPINION & FEATURES; Columns Length: 1078 words Body   FRIDAY (Jun 23) marks the seventh anniversary of the UK's EU exit referendum, yet the nation is widely perceived still not to be "making Brexit work".This is not just the view of what Brexiteers disparagingly call "Remainiacs" (those who wanted to stay in the EU in 2016), but also a growing number of Brexiteers themselves. Take the example of perhaps the Leave campaign's leading light, Nigel Farage, who sensationally declared last month that "Brexit has failed... we've not delivered".The argument of Farage, and a growing number of other Leavers in the UK, is that Conservative prime ministers since 2016 - namely Theresa May, Boris Johnson, Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak - have failed to take advantage of what he perceives as the significant freedoms of Brexit. Notably, this includes the opportunity to diverge economically from the EU, in areas such as taxation, to seek to drive competitive advantage for the UK.Significant as this development is, however, the groundswell of discontent against Brexit is far broader. One YouGov opinion poll last month found that such regret has reached record levels, with only 9 per cent of the UK population now believing Brexit was more of a success than a failure.In the same poll, the number of Leave voters from 2016 who think Brexit is now a mistake hit the highest level so far, at 22 per cent.  Most of these individuals said that "Brexit had previously the potential to be a success, but the implementation of it by this and/or previous governments made it a fail". However, 56 per cent of the wider population who consider Brexit to be a failure think it was doomed from the start.Paralleling the growing disdain for Brexit is a growing drive by some leading politicians, including former Conservative deputy prime minister Lord Heseltine, to secure UK re-entry into the EU. If the 2016 Brexit referendum had been held today, it is possible that the UK would have remained in the Brussels-based club. However, a key challenge for UK advocates of EU membership today is that the terms of entry would be different to those on which the UK exited the club. Over time, London negotiated a series of opt-outs, including of the eurozone single currency; plus a sizeable budgetary rebate.It is far from clear that a majority could be secured for such new terms of membership in any referendum that might be required to ratify potential UK membership in the future. Growing support for the EU since 2016 is wide, but may be shallow in any further heated campaign.It should be remembered here that it took Eurosceptics four decades to overturn the UK's first 1975 EU referendum decision. So it may take a generation for any countervailing movement to gain critical mass, by which time the EU could have changed fundamentally.With the next general election now likely in 2024, and polls indicating that the Conservatives might well lose power, a key question therefore is how any incoming Labour team would address this huge issue. The party's leader Keir Starmer has ruled out any government he leads seeking to re-join the EU.This is reshaping the centre of debate away from "Brexit versus Remain", towards how best to try to make Brexit work in practice. A key, pragmatic reason for taking this stance is that the UK is in such turmoil, with no clear post-Brexit settlement emerging under the Conservatives, that all the energies of a Starmer government would need to be focused on this issue.The UK economy is forecast to have the most significant economic challenges of any G7 economy. Plus a wider sense of political drift in recent years under the successive governments of not just May, Johnson, Truss and Sunak, but also David Cameron too.With Labour having ruled out re-joining the EU, and the Conservatives now have very few pro-European legislators in their midst following purges under Johnson's premiership, it is unlikely that the UK will go back into the Brussels-based club in the medium term. So Labour's focus is now much more on making Brexit work better for the UK, given the mess the Conservatives are making.Starmer has pledged to "deliver on the opportunities the United Kingdom has to sort out the poor EU withdrawal deal Johnson signed, and end the UK's Brexit divisions once and for all". He argues that making Brexit work is essential because the nation "cannot move forward or grow the country or deliver change or win back the trust of those who have lost faith in politics if we're constantly focused on the arguments of the past".His forward-looking agenda therefore emphasises that the nation must invest much more, post-Brexit, in the UK people, places and initiatives to try to deliver on the potential the country has. Meanwhile, he wants the nation to take advantage of new freedoms such as the ability to cut tax on energy bills that the Conservatives have failed to deliver on so far.What is now becoming clearer is that Johnson's deal created structural impediments to trade that aren't improving. This has been highlighted by national business groups such as the British Chambers of Commerce, which has made proposals for additional UK side deals with the EU to smooth out the many rough edges of the 2020 pact.The EU got much of what it wanted from that agreement, including a zero-tariff, zero-quota deal for goods, in which it runs a surplus with the UK. Meanwhile, Brussels gave away little on services which is the UK's strength. The longer the agreement remains unchanged, the more economic activity will therefore potentially migrate given that the government put the UK at disadvantage vis-a-vis competitors inside the European Single Market.It is in this context that there is growing support across the political spectrum, even within Sunak's UK government, for a closer economic relationship with the EU. For some, like the Liberal Democrats and Scottish National Party, this means re-joining the Brussels-based club.The two main UK parties, however, are more focused on closer ties, short of EU membership. Within the UK government for instance, Finance Minister Jeremy Hunt has admitted that Johnson's hard Brexit deal has caused damaging trade barriers.The stakes in play are therefore huge and historic for both the UK and EU. A new more constructive partnership can hopefully bring benefits for both sides at a time of significant geopolitical flux, especially with the Ukraine war continuing apace.The writer is an associate at LSE IDEAS at the London School of Economics Graphic    The number of Leave voters from 2016 who now think Brexit was a mistake has hit the highest level so far, at 22 per cent, according to a YouGov opinion poll. Load-Date: June 21, 2023  End of Document
