   Sharp fall in trade volumes blamed on Brexit's impact; Goods flows Financial Times (London, England) March 2, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 318 words Byline: VALENTINA ROMEI Body   The goods trade has suffered its steepest five-year fall on record, highlighting how Brexit has reduced flows both into and out of Britain, say economists. The volume of UK goods imports and exports was 7.4 per cent smaller in 2023 than in 2018, the largest five-year decline in goods trade since comparable records began in 1997, according to Financial Times calculations of data published by the Office for National Statistics yesterday. The ONS reported that the volume of imports fell 7.4 per cent compared with 2022 and was down 3.8 per cent compared with 2018. Exports fell 4.6 per cent year on year, with substantial drops in exports to both EU and non-EU countries. Over five years, export volumes fell 12.4 per cent. Emily Fry, economist at the Resolution Foundation think-tank, said after years of data being affected by the pandemic and the energy price shock, the 2023 figures were a real "big sign" of the impact of Brexit. "A clear implication of this [data] is that the new trade barriers that were put in place by Brexit are having an effect on trade," she said. "The UK's weak trade performance is unusual among advanced economies," said John Springford, deputy director of the Centre for European Reform thinktank. He added that most countries saw an increase in goods trade after the pandemic, but "the UK did not participate in the boom thanks to the trade barriers that it imposed upon itself", adding: "The obvious culprit is Brexit." In its latest economic and fiscal outlook, the Office for Budget Responsibility noted that in 2023 UK trade intensity - exports and imports as a share of the economy - was 1.7 per cent below its 2019 level, driven by poor goods performance. This contrasted with an average increase of 1.9 per cent across other G7 economies. "This may suggest that Brexit frictions and post-pandemic disruptions have weighed more on trade in goods than on services," it said. Load-Date: March 1, 2024  End of Document
