   SINN FÉIN IN DENIAL AFTER ELECTION MELTDOWN; The scale of the calamity that befell Sinn Féin at the polls can be explained by froth and floating voters, writes Jody Corcoran Sunday Independent June 16, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 2069 words Byline: Jody Corcoran Body   he local and European elections raise questions for Sinn Féin, which so far have not been properly acknowledged, let alone answered. T The party, which won less than 12pc of the vote in both elections, is to "reflect" and carry out a "review". Every party that performs poorly, and even those that do well, reflect and review. The party is also promising to be "humble", which is not a bad idea. This speaks to an accusation of over-confidence, that Sinn Féin came to believe its own publicity over the past five years. But that still doesn't explain what happened last week. IDENTITY CRISIS In the aftermath, there has been loads of talk about "incumbents" and "too many candidates". This may account for a few left-behind seats, but comes nowhere near explaining the scale of the calamity for Sinn Féin. Mary Lou McDonald has said the party needs to outline its policies more clearly, but again, while there is truth in that, failure to do so before now would not account for such a meltdown. She also said the public held Sinn Féin accountable for government mistakes - which, she said, "makes absolutely no sense". This is just more deflection on her part, but there is a point here to which I will come back. But the reality has yet to be faced by Sinn Féin - that its performance raises the most serious questions for the party. The bottom line is that Sinn Féin needs to ask itself where it most naturally fits into the political landscape. Is it a Brit-hating, Tricolour-waving, Ireland-uniting, hard nationalist party? Or a trendy, progressive, left-of-centre, European small "r" republican party? These elections have shown it cannot be both. To analyse what happened in the local and European elections, we need to look at the last three general elections and, to some degree, what happened in between. In my view, this will show two things: first, that Sinn Féin's opinion poll approval ratings since 2020, when it rose to between 30pc and 35pc, was pure froth; and second, that the party's breakthrough victory in the 2020 election was an aberration - a freak result - built on sand. It may be that the result of these elections (less than 12pc) more accurately reflects Sinn Féin's real standing, its core vote - although I suspect it will be a little more, with higher turnout. THE BREXIT EFFECT The 2011 general election changed everything in this country. That was the post-crash election that broke the two-party Fianna Fáil-Fine Gael hegemony. Gerry Adams was leader of Sinn Féin back then. The party went into the election with five seats and came out with 14, on 9.9pc of the vote. More to the point, 2011 was Fianna Fáil's meltdown election (from which it has never fully recovered), winning 17.4pc of the vote then, down from over 40pc. The big winner was Fine Gael, as Fianna Fáil voters primarily supported Enda Kenny's party - famously at the borrowed request of Phil Hogan. (As I argued here before the local and European elections, the same former Fianna Fáil voters went to Sinn Féin in freakish numbers in 2020. And in these most recent elections they abandoned Sinn Féin and primarily voted Independent.) However, in 2016, and still under the leadership of Adams, Sinn Féin continued its incremental growth, ordinary and organic, winning 13.9pc of the vote. This was Fianna Fáil's "comeback" election, in which it won over 24pc of the vote, marginally more than its share in last week's local elections. The outcome of that 2016 election was the "confidence and supply" government comprising Fine Gael and Shane Ross's Independent Alliance, underwritten by Fianna Fáil. With due respect to Kenny, Ross and Leo Varadkar - who took over as taoiseach halfway through - this was not regarded as a successful administration. It was an experiment worth having, but not one likely to be repeated in the near future. That government did, however, have to contend with one of the most serious issues to face the country in recent memory: Brexit. Leaving aside how it was handled by the British government, especially with regard to the DUP, Brexit had a significant cultural impact on the State. It let loose a form of hard nationalism, meat and drink to Sinn Féin, that had been under wraps here throughout and since the Troubles. And it let it loose with a vengeance. All of a sudden, the entire raison d'etre of Sinn Féin - a united Ireland - was de rigueur. There were other issues, not least a housing crisis. And in cool, trendy, progressive Eoin Ó Broin, Sinn Féin was on a winner too. But it was Brexit that let loose the animal spirits. FLIP-FLOP POLITICS In the 2020 election, a perfect storm of hard nationalism and a housing crisis related to the crash that decimated Fianna Fáil propelled Sinn Féin to 24.5pc of the vote under new leader Mary Lou McDonald. That was, in my opinion, a freak result for a party that had been incrementally growing by 2pc to 3pc in every general election since the Good Friday Agreement. Sinn Féin was not expecting the outcome. One of its candidates thought so little of her chances that she was on holiday abroad during the campaign; others who failed to be elected locally a few months earlier topped the poll in the general election. Mary Lou McDonald framed the victory as a demand for "change". Certainly, it was informed by a housing and homelessness crisis, but it was rocket-fuelled by the hard nationalism let loose by Brexit. The problem with hard nationalism is that once it's let out, it's very difficult to get back in the box - as the immigration crisis is now showing. Here is a more recent example: a few weeks ago, when the Irish and UK governments were rowing over asylumseekers coming from Britain via Northern Ireland, a curious thing happened in the opinion polls. The steady decline of Sinn Féin until then, related to immigration, was arrested. The party briefly shot up again, by three points to 29pc, in the Sunday Independent/Ireland Thinks poll. Kick the Brits and Sinn Féin goes up in the polls. But in the same poll, a majority of the party's "supporters" wanted border checks on the island of Ireland to keep out asylum-seekers from Britain. These were let-loose nationalists, fair-weather Sinn Féin supporters. The die was cast on the night of the Dublin riots. Opinion polling pinpoints that as the moment Sinn Féin support began to fall in earnest. The riots shocked middle Ireland, which rallied to the side of the State. In polls that weekend, the approval ratings of Micheál Martin, Leo Varadkar and Justice Minister Helen McEntee went up. Sinn Féin has always had a questionable relationship with the State - to put it mildly. In response to the riots, Mary Lou McDonald called for the justice minister to resign and tabled a vote of no-confidence in her, the darling of progressive, young urban women. But it was the Sinn Féin leader's approval rating that began to tank - and her party began the fall from which it has never recovered. This showed a party at risk of losing middle Ireland. Pearse Doherty, and others such as Ó Broin, have assiduously tried to court middle Ireland, in a presentation to Davy institutional investors in London, for example. Doherty told those investors Sinn Féin would "tame" the far right. Whatever about the far right, in these elections it was the traditional conservative and mostly rural right that tamed Sinn Féin. As it went down in the polls, the party panicked and appeared to flip-flop on immigration. Where once it held a progressive, leftof-centre view, now its attitude was said to be hardening in line with growing support for Independents. As I have said here before, that support is mostly working- and lower-middleclass, largely rural-based, though urban too. And in the local and European elections, these around-the-houses voters, who took a direct hit in the crash on their apartments in Bulgaria and paid the price during austerity, abandoned Sinn Féin and turned to the Independents. In European candidates such as Michael McNamara, Ciaran Mullooly and Niall Boylan, these voters heard "common-sense" voices that raised the same questions and expressed similar concerns over immigration, however opportunistically. And not just on immigration, but on the new green agenda too, which explains why the Green Party suffered a setback in rural Ireland last week. In the local elections, these voters also went Independent - particularly for a new Independent Ireland party - centred on TDs such as Verona Murphy, who can be loosely described as from the Fianna Fáil or Fine Gael gene pool. Such Independent TDs said and did things that Sinn Féin, on the brink of power, felt it could not say or do. PARTY IN PANIC MODE As the polls showed decline, Sinn Féin hardened its line - it opposed Europe's migration pact. It was one of several mis-steps that showed a party in panic mode. And in the aftermath of the family and care referendum defeats, for example, it came out against McEntee's proposed legislation on hate speech. But that, in turn, caused progressive, left-of-centre urban supporters to become confused - the downward spiral continued. There were other issues, of course. Housing, as ever, was in there, though people seem to feel progress is being made on that issue, however slowly. Sinn Féin's frothy opinion poll bounce to 35pc also occurred during the storms of Covid and Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which put the after-burners on food and fuel prices, causing a cost-of-living crisis. This was grist to the mill of the lead opposition party, but the Government handled these challenges reasonably well: there were around 1,000 excess deaths - a relatively good outcome; and every few months, several hundred euro turned up in peoples' accounts to help meet gas and electricity bills. In short, people seemed to come to view this Government as being significantly better than the last one. The economy was going well too, for which the finance minister got much credit. Ministers such as Norma Foley and Darragh O'Brien were perceived to be good or more competent than those in the "confidence and supply" arrangement that gave rise to Sinn Féin's unnatural breakthrough. Even the health service showed improvements. All of these factors had a role to play in last week's election - shoring up support for the parties in Government. Now back to that wider issue, referred to by Mary Lou McDonald - that people seemed to hold Sinn Féin to account for the Government's mistakes. At face level, it is nonsense, but there is something behind it… The radicalised, angry voter, burnt in the crash and, as he sees it, besieged by immigrants and green agenda rules and regulations that threatened his way of life, turned to Sinn Féin five years ago. He saw that party as different, as not being of the elites, as signifying (to use the hackneyed term) "change". Then he witnessed Sinn Féin change before his eyes in preparation for power - from populist, nationalist outsider to left-of-centre, pro-immigration, she/her 'woke' party on the wrong side of more proposed constitutional change, cosying up to investors in London and the comfortable classes in middle Ireland. So he went for Independent man down the road, who eats his dinner in the middle of the www.day.No loyalty. Built on sand. DECISIONS, DECISIONS What's more, according to polling, he would now prefer these gene-pool Independents to go into government with both Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael ahead of Sinn Féin. So, for Sinn Féin, these elections are about far more than "incumbents" and "too many candidates". Not only has it lost the backing of middle Ireland, but a double whammy now threatens. The 'woke' urban liberals - confused by Sinn Féin and alarmed at the rise of tricolour far-right clowns - turned to Labour and the Social Democrats and, indeed, the Greens. And as the tide went out, Sinn Féin was left with a core vote of around 12pc. So, to answer the question: the crisis facing Sinn Féin is deep, cultural, perhaps even existential. The days of a catch-all party are gone. The Waterford Sinn Féin workers who said the party needed to stop trying to ape the old Fianna Fáil were right. For Sinn Féin, the time has come to decide what it stands for and where it fits in to the political landscape. Hardright nationalist or soft-progressive left? Radical populist or party of government? It can ride only one horse. After the Dublin riots, Mary Lou's approval rating began to tank - and her party began the fall from which it has never recovered Graphic    Sinn Féin's mis-steps allowed Independent candidates to prosperFormer Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams Load-Date: June 16, 2024  End of Document
