   Small exporters struggling to repair Brexit damage The Times (London) January 29, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 35 Length: 399 words Byline: James Hurley Body   Small and medium-sized companies are struggling to rebuild export trade after Brexit and the pandemic, with overseas sales failing to match a recovery in their domestic performance, an employers group has said. The British Chambers of Commerce said there had been a "noticeable divergence between domestic trade performance and exports" and that small exporters "have been disproportionately impacted" by headwinds in global trade caused by the Covid crisis and new trade barriers with the EU. The group's trade survey of 2,000 SMEs found that the proportion who saw UK trade increase in the final quarter of 2022 stood at a third, while only one in four saw an improvement in export performance. The proportion of businesses reporting decreased overseas sales began to rise in the run-up to Brexit and has remained stubbornly higher ever since, the British Chambers of Commerce said. William Bain, head of trade policy at the organisation, said: "The global outlook was already looking fragile for 2024, but with increasing disruption to Red Sea shipping routes and continued geopolitical uncertainty, it appears even more brittle. The reality is if we want to remain one of the world's largest economies, then we need to get more firms selling goods and services internationally. This is not easily done in the aftermath of a pandemic, supply chain disruption, Brexit, increased non-tariff trade barriers and further global headwinds. Separate research by Bibby Financial Services found that small exporters cited the impact of Brexit as the second factor hampering their growth, behind inflation. The group said that in 2017, in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote, the decision to leave the European Union was cited as a problem for four in ten SME importers and fewer than one in three exporters. Today, close to two thirds of both small importers and exporters say Brexit is having a negative impact on their businesses. Michael McGowan, managing director of Bibby Foreign Exchange, part of the group, said the issues would intensify because new post-Brexit border checks were due to be implemented. Later this week, the UK will introduce additional requirements for live animals or animal products, plants, fruit, vegetables, cut flowers, trees or used agricultural machinery imported from the EU. At the end of April, the UK will introduce physical and documentary checks on certain goods. Load-Date: January 29, 2024  End of Document
