   SNP adviser who queried independence says his quotes were weaponised thetimes.co.uk March 26, 2024 Tuesday 12:40 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 613 words Byline: Neil Pooran, Kieran Andrews Highlight: Mark Blyth warned that taking Scotland out of the UK would be the ‘biggest Brexit of all time’ Body   A former adviser to Nicola Sturgeon has vowed never again to discuss Scottish economics after his remarks were “weaponised” into a “wholesale attack on independence”. Mark Blyth, an international economics professor at Brown University in the US who was appointed to the Advisory Council for Economic Transformation, was criticised after warning that independence would be the “biggest Brexit of all time”. Speaking at a pro-independence event called Scotonomics, he had renewed his criticism of SNP claims that a new Scottish state would emulate Nordic countries. “I fully understand the desire to be separate, but the idea that this isn’t gonna hurt — ooft,” he said. “You can’t really say that Brexit is the worst thing ever then commit the biggest Brexit of all time. Which is literally what this is. So if you’re going to think about this, being independent, you’ve got to think very sensibly about what this means and how you’re going to develop income-generating assets to pay for stuff. “Why? Because at the end of the day as a small, open economy, which you then will be, you need to balance your imports and your imports and your exports over the long term, or everyone thinks your currency is shite.” He claimed that investors dumping an independent Scotland’s currency could lead to a “mini-Argentina” scenario and then attacked the SNP’s comparison of Scotland with  countries such as Norway and Denmark . “Scotland, particularly in nationalist circles, likes to say that Scotland is a small, open economy like the Nordic economies,” he said. “That’s a bit like saying I’m a supermodel because I also have legs.” The SNP and other proponents of  independence  have often pointed to Brexit as a reason Scotland would be economically better off leaving the UK and rejoining the EU.  However, Blyth has now condemned selective quoting and said his quotes were “weaponised” by being taken out of context. “This is why I’m done ever talking about Scotland,” he wrote on Twitter/X. “It’s toxic. No one wants any actual discussion of options. You say X and they say you said Y and then spend time writing corrections. Life’s too short. Done.”  The Scottish government has published a series of papers making the case for independence. They are predicated on what ministers call “overwhelming” evidence that other European countries outperform the UK economically. Liz Smith, the Scottish Conservative economy spokeswoman, called Blyth’s comments “a devastating demolition of the economic case for independence by a former adviser to the SNP government”. She said: “The reality is that an independent Scotland would lead to a hard border with by far our greatest trading partner, and put our entire economy, which is already stagnating under the SNP’s high-tax regime, at risk.” Willie Rennie, Scottish Liberal Democrat economy spokesman, said: “It’s bad enough for the SNP that their economic case for independence has been demolished by a leading academic but for it to be demolished by a leading academic that the SNP leadership endorsed is devastating.” Keith Brown, the SNP deputy leader, insisted that the case for independence had never been stronger and compared Scotland to both Nordic countries, which have higher tax rates and a larger state, and  Ireland , which has lower taxes and no equivalent of the NHS. “With people across Scotland paying the heavy price for broken Brexit Britain and no Westminster party offering any alternative, the case for independence has never been so strong,” he said. “Whether it’s cruel and incompetent Tory governments or being dragged out of the EU against our will, Scotland is suffering by decisions taken in Westminster that ignore our interests.” Load-Date: March 26, 2024  End of Document
