   SOME Tories desperate to [...]; Littlejohn Scottish Daily Mail December 12, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; OPINION, COLUMN; Pg. 17 Length: 1015 words Byline: Richard Little John Body   SOME Tories desperate to get rid of Rishi are fantasising about a 'dream ticket' of Boris and Nigel Farage to rescue the party. LAKeSIDe Country Club Surrey is probably these days as home of the World Championship. It was featured in that knockabout episode of The Sweeney, Morecambe and Wise, and over the years showcased everyone from Tommy Cooper The Two Ronnies. Now why didn't I think of that? Actually, I did. I first suggested it in May 2019 at the time of the EU elections, which Farage's Brexit Party won convincingly. That column featured a brilliant Gary cartoon of Nige and Bojo as Morecambe and Wise, under the headline 'Bring Me Sunshine'. Lakeside is also said to be the model Peter Kay's brilliant Northern variety spoof Phoenix Nights. If there's a retro about the place, that's no bad thing. Michael Parkinson once said: 'you better class of person down Memory On Sunday night, Nigel Farage topped bill at a sold-out BREXIT Party Lakeside. A full house of 1,600 people Farage and his fellow candidates rafters. I only know about it because my friends, Robert Rowland, is standing the BREXIT Party alongside Farage South east, and was chosen to the opening address. you won't have seen coverage of the on the BBC. Or anywhere else, for matter. The mainstream broadcast spend most of their time belittling the Party, when they are not ignoring altogether. So do the arrogant, politicians from the traditional parties, kid themselves that once Thursday's 'vote' is out of the way, it will be business as usual. But out in the country, something is happening. From the North-england to the South-West, people who never taken much of an interest in are flocking to BREXIT Party rallies. They've had enough of being patronised, being dismissed as thick racists who stupid to know what they are voting They are throwing their support sincere men and women from all life and backgrounds who have put careers and families on hold to take political establishment. My friend Robert Rowland is a 50-father-of-four, ex-RAF, who made bob in finance. he has never played an role in politics before. But he subscribes the philosophy of edmund Burke: that is necessary for the triumph of Of course, we shouldn't even have been taking part in EU elections, three years after voting Leave, but the Tory party blew it and anointed Remainer Mother Theresa as PM. for good men to do nothing. Robert decided it was time to stand up and be counted. So have countless other good men and women, who put themselves forward as BREXIT Party candidates - from former dyed-inthe-wool Tory businessmen to oldschool Lefties such as Claire Fox. They If a Boris/Farage axis had been put in place immediately after the referendum, when Call Me Dave ran away, they could have an extensive range of real-life experience, utterly divorced from the nar rowl y drawn ranks of the careerist mediocrities who inhabit the Westminster bubble. Farage's Brexit Party slate is far more diverse than any of the grim of of won a snap election and we would have been spared the debilitating Stop Brexit shenanigans of Bercow/Starmer et al. Bring Me Sunshine'.. Which is why I suggested it again that November when Boris had replaced May and called a Get Brexit Done election. Bring me Farage generously agreed to stand down his candidates to give BREXIT the Tories a free run, particularly in Red Wall seats. Boris owed him big time. those who voted Leave. Nor those who refuse to accept the legitimate result of the referendum. you can bet, too, that even if BREXIT Party polls 35 per cent on Thursday, as predicted, Remainers will still say it proves nothing. The result will be dismissed as an inchoate scream ignorant xenophobes. Some voters might be howling the moon, but who can blame them? Look at the way millions of traditional Labour supporters in North are being betrayed by Corbyn's metropolitan Momentum crowd and full-on federasts like BREXIT spokesman Keir Stürmer the preposterous Pixie Balls-Cooper. But the peerage Nige deserved was not forthcoming and although Brexit got done, after a fashion, Farage and his Leave ultras feel they have subsequently been betrayed by the Tories. Assurances made at the time have not been honoured. Corbyn is even coming down in favour of freedom of movement a second referendum. That should play well in Phoenix Nights country. We can only hope a BREXIT landslide brings the political to its senses. But don't hold breath. having done all they can to stop BREXIT, Tory Remainers are now moving heaven and earth to keep Boris, the People's Choice, off the ballot to succeed May. They must insane. Boris should have got job after the referendum. When they're not polishing their leadership credentials, Boris's claim to be worried that he might do a deal with Farage's. But if two most popular men in British politics could put their planetary personalities aside, would be wrong with that? So why should he ride to the rescue, despite teasing yesterday that he never says never? And does Boris need the aggro right now? He can always try to bounce back after the party implodes, if he feels so inclined. BOTh played pivotal roles in delivering the Leave vote in 2016. And both actually believe in BREXIT. Well, I think Boris does, but you know.) What's more, they share an optimistic view of Britain...'s future, confident we can thrive in the global economy once we have cast the shackles of Brussels. least, like Morecambe and they might bring - jusome sunshine, unlike theremorseless, defeatist drivel we have been force-fed by May and the rest the political class for the past years. But the Farage/Boris 'dream ticket' dreamers can dream on. But first, at the risk of sounding Boris, we must cleanse the Augean stables. And that will only achieved by casting millions of for the BREXIT Party. It's an idea whose time came and went four years ago. It ain't gonna happen. Sorry, but I don't buy the argument that voting BREXIT will in Corbyn. Labour is thoroughly discredited, too, and has as much to lose at this election as Tories. And, anyway, what kind of a pitch vote for us because we're n - as Load-Date: December 12, 2023  End of Document
