   Spanish scientists in the UK present project to strengthen ties with the EU CE Noticias Financieras English April 10, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 430 words Body   London, Apr 10 (EFE) - The Society of Spanish Scientists in the United Kingdom (CERU) presented on Wednesday in London 'CONNECTS-UK', a project aimed at strengthening connections between the research communities of the European bloc and the United Kingdom after Brexit. At an event held at Imperial College where panel discussions took place and several speakers from the scientific community participated, Nicole Mannion, the number two of the Delegation of the European Union in this country, said that the project "aims to develop a platform to advance scientific collaborations between the EU and the UK based on exchanges and networking." As he noted, "it will benefit from the large community of EU citizens in the UK and the potential of young people who want to develop the relationship with the EU." "It comes at a very useful time now that the UK has partnered with Horizon Europe," said Mannion, who said it is "really fantastic that UK-based scientists will now be involved in research programs with scientists across Europe." CONNECTS-UK, the first pan-European platform focused on strengthening relations between the research communities of the European Union (EU) and the United Kingdom after Brexit, with funding from the European Commission, "is a very good match," he added. For his part, the Spaniard Javier Pardo, president of the coordinating board of that project, explained that in addition to organizing scientific networking events, "the effects of Brexit on the EU research diaspora have been analyzed and the ties between the UK and the EU have been strengthened at a time when connections between the two regions were still very difficult after Brexit." "This project connects European communities with science in the U.K.," he said. Pardo said the short-term goals of the project are to "increase their associations' memberships, establish themselves as key agents for UK and EU institutions, and create connections with EU and UK academic institutions." In the medium term, they have ambitions to "engage with society, highlighting the value of the work of EU researchers in this country; produce reports on the situation of the EU research diaspora and the effects of Brexit; and strengthen scientific mobility and research collaborations between the two sides." The project has EU funding of around half a million euros, which reflects, according to a statement, "its commitment to advancing scientific progress and also underlines the importance of maintaining robust research ties between the EU and the UK to jointly eradicate global challenges." EFE prc/ads Load-Date: April 11, 2024  End of Document
