   Starmer should show courage and offer hope to voters keen on rejoining the EU The Courier February 8, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 26 Length: 768 words Byline: Stuart Nicolson Body   Last week in this column, in the course of discussing Brexit and the fourth anniversary of the UK leaving the EU, I observed how Labour under Keir Starmer offer no way back into Europe and how the only prospect of Scotland rejoining the bloc is as an independent member state in its own right. In the days since, a former Scottish Labour leader has made the remarkable confession to having voted SNP, so enraged were they by their own party's timid position on Europe. Fellow Courier columnist Kezia Dugdale's admission that she had backed the SNP in the 2019 European elections - a point at which she was no longer Labour leader north of the border but still held a Labour seat at Holyrood - is an extraordinary one on many levels. For any elected politician, let alone a recent party leader, to mark their cross against a different party in the ballot box is quite a step. As is making it public. So, Kezia deserves credit for her candour, even almost five years on from the event. But the admission also poses a number of questions in terms of current Labour policy, and what options are open to those in Scotland, and the rest of the UK, who want the chance to choose to rejoin the EU. The point at which Dugdale went against her own party was when Jeremy Corbyn still led Labour and was lukewarm, to put it charitably, in his opposition to the Conservatives' headlong drive towards the hardest of hard Brexits. Corbyn is of a school of thought on the left that has always believed the EU to be some kind of capitalist club intent on doing down the working classes across the whole continent. The irony that it is the EU which has arguably done more than any UK Government to bring forward social protections for workers and to deliver a host of other measures which should find favour with those who are left of centre, was presumably completely lost on the then Labour leader. But here's the rub. If Kezia Dugdale and many other Labour supporters were, in her own words, "so mad about Brexit" they found it impossible to vote for their own party given its stance under Corbyn, they should be equally furious about the position under Starmer, which other than some tinkering around the edges, appears to be no different. The current Labour leader seems intent on becoming prime minister almost by default. As such, he is increasingly determined to deviate as little as possible from a whole raft of Tory policies, including on Europe. You can take the view that that is smart politics, in the desire to sweep up the centre ground which has been vacated by the Tories' lurch to the right. But the truth is that many of those centrist voters across swathes of the UK would be more than happy to have the chance of reversing Brexit, at the very least held out to them as a prospect on the horizon. Starmer - who was part of the shadow cabinet that acquiesced in Corbyn's effective backing for leaving the EU - won't countenance that for fear of reigniting the bitter Brexit wars that turned Westminster into a virtual comedy circus for four long years. Again, on a purely political level that may be understandable, if the calculation is simply to get elected with the minimum of fuss. But the fact is there is no serious prospect of Labour not winning the next UK election, so Starmer could afford, if he wished, to be a bit truer to his own convictions on a range of policies, not least on Brexit. In doing so, he would not be going against the grain of public opinion. The most recent poll of polls shows strong support for rejoining the EU among UK voters, with the margin running at almost 60-40 against Brexit. The coming Westminster election, unlike the last two, will not be fought, won or lost over the issue of Brexit - and many will be grateful for that, whatever their views on the subject, given the way it dominated the agenda for years. But it will remain the elephant in the room of British politics. Here, the SNP will continue to make the case for Scotland's membership of the EU as an independent member state; something which resonates powerfully with many voters, particularly younger ones who have seen their horizons narrowed by the pro-Brexit consensus at Westminster which offers no other route back. Jeremy Corbyn is, justifiably, criticised by pro-EU voices for his failure to properly oppose Brexit when it was, arguably, still possible to avoid it. But if Kezia Dugdale felt angry enough at Corbyn's stance to vote SNP in 2019, there's every justification, given Starmer's timidity, to do the same in 2024. He could afford to be a bit truer to his own convictions on a range of policies - like Brexit Graphic    KEEPING QUIET: Ex-Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, left, and Sir Keir Starmer have differing - but seldom expressed - EU views. Load-Date: February 8, 2024  End of Document
