   Stephen Flynn slams 'shameful' Labour Brexit stance ahead of campaign visit The National (Scotland) August 9, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 631 words Byline: Abbi Garton-Crosbie Body   STEPHEN Flynn has attacked Labour-s "shameful" stance on Brexit ahead of a campaign visit to Rutherglen and Hamilton West. The SNP Westminster group leader warned that Brexit is -fuelling the UK cost of living crisis- and impacting families in the hotly contested Westminster constituency, where a by-election is expected to be held in October. Ahead of campaigning in Cambuslang on Wednesday, Flynn said that Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer had -sold Scotland out- by supporting a Tory hard Brexit. READ MORE: Scottish Tory MP Andrew Bowie made misleading council tax claim He pointed to the billions lost from Scotland-s economy, EU funding cut in Rutherglen and Hamilton West, and the impact of increasing inflation, mortgage rates and food prices impact families in the area. It comes as SNP candidate and local councillor Katy Loudon challenged Labour candidate Michael Shanks to explain why the party supports a Brexit that makes families in the area -poorer-. Shanks previously quit Labour over the party-s position on the issue in 2019, when he said that Labour had "a bankrupt approach to our membership of the EU and is complacent about the impact it will have on the poorest people across the UK". Since 2019, Labour now fully supports Brexit, with Starmer ruling out any return to the EU, single market, or freedom of movement. Ahead of the campaign visit, Flynn (pictured above) said: "Brexit is fuelling the UK cost of living crisis and making families in Rutherglen and Hamilton West poorer - and the SNP is the only party offering an escape from Brexit with independence. "Sir Keir Starmer's pro-Brexit Labour Party has sold Scotland out by backing a hard Tory Brexit - and ruling out any return to the EU and single market. -That shameful decision has cost Scotland billions of pounds, cut EU financial support for South Lanarkshire, and increased household mortgage bills, rents and food prices to unacceptable levels. "A vote for the SNP at the Rutherglen and Hamilton West by-election is a vote to reject Brexit and tackle the cost of living. READ MORE: Mhairi Black: Trans people should not be made into intellectual debate -Katy Loudon is the only candidate that will stand up for Scotland's interests in the face of this Westminster-made cost of living crisis." Loudon, SNP councillor for Cambuslang East on South Lanarkshire Council, said Brexit has been a -disaster- for the area. "Michael Shanks must explain why the Labour Party supports a hard Tory Brexit, which is making families in Rutherglen and Hamilton West poorer - and costing Scotland billions of pounds,- Loudon said. "Brexit has taken vital EU funding away from our community and cost local families dearly, as it fuels inflation and sends people's mortgages, rents, food prices and living costs soaring. "Mr Shanks previously admitted the Labour Party's support for Brexit is 'bankrupt', and warned of the impact it has on the poorest people, but he now obeys the party line. It's total hypocrisy. "Unlike the pro-Brexit Labour Party, I will always stand up for Scotland's interests. "A vote for the SNP at this by-election is a vote to reject Brexit and tackle the cost of living." READ MORE: Lee Anderson branded 'pound shop Enoch Powell' for anti-migrant call Responding to Flynn-s visit, Scottish Labour deputy leader Jackie Baillie said: -The SNP-s increasingly desperate interventions against the Labour party shows just how out of ideas they are. -They are resorting to attacks because they have nothing to show for their 16 years in government and nothing to offer voters in Rutherglen and Hamilton West. -The cost-of-living crisis is causing misery in Rutherglen and Hamilton West and across the UK - and while the SNP try and score political points off this crisis, Labour is setting out concrete plans to fix it.- Load-Date: August 9, 2023  End of Document
