   There is no axe to grind, only research Leicester Mercury April 12, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 851 words Body   I AM particularly pleased that V Hallam ("A gross distortion of government facts," Mailbox, April 5) of Leire took up the challenge to my previous assertions that Labour is a better custodian of our economy (than the Tories). This is an absolutely critical matter for people when deciding which way to vote at the upcoming local and national elections. He/she, however, provides no empirical evidence for his/her case, relies wholly on anecdote and falls back on some very tired Tory examples such as the "resort to the IMF" (Callaghan) and Wilson's "devaluation of the pound". These are weak points from an entirely different Keynesian economic era and, anyway, in the case of the first, caused by a Tory Chancellor (Barber) who fuelled inflation which led to the subsequent sterling crisis of 1976. Further huge bouts of inflation occurred in coincidence with the liberalisation of money markets under Thatcher and, of course, we have had the latest weakening of sterling following Brexit (the currency is now worth 10 per cent less against the euro than before Brexit). Empirical research comes up with an overwhelming conclusion - that Labour are better at running the economy. There is a wealth of analysis which makes very uncomfortable reading for V Hallam. Some examples: Economists Dr Amr Algarhi and Dr Alexander Tziamalis examined the performance of the UK economy from 1955 to 2019 and compared the strength of Labour and Conservative track records. They found "the overall picture that emerges is that growth has been more stable during periods when the Labour Party is in power". The London Economic said "the Conservative Party was found to be disproportionately likely to preside over a shrinking economy: Indeed, despite the 2008 recession during Labour's watch, from a total of 24 quarters which can be classified as in recession, only seven came under Labour versus 17 under the Conservatives." A detailed report (for Channel 4) covering all the macro-economic variables including growth, earnings, employment, health and education spending and days lost to industrial action finds Labour over time in the best position. The report states "statistically, the Conservatives have presided over a far slower growth in earnings than Labour, on average. Median gross annual earnings grew by an average of £638 in the six Labour years from 2005-2010 (inclusive). Then, under the Conservatives, they grew by an average of just £389 per year between 2011-2016." We then have the Tory Brexit. The only time in history when a nation has deliberately imposed economic sanctions on www.itself.No sector remains undamaged. Farming and fishing have been shafted by catastrophic Tory deals outside of Europe. Car production has halved since 2016, small exporters and importers are in trouble, our hospitality sector is on its knees because it can't recruit from Europe, the university sector massively hit by the lack of foreign students and this is before we get to the ongoing mess in Northern Ireland, health waiting lists, local authorities going bust and the housing shortage. Brexit is costing us an absolute fortune. Bloomberg has estimated around £100 billion per annum. This is actual money that could be used to stop people dying unnecessarily because of a broken NHS and giving shelter to others who now sleep cold on our streets. And this on top of the fact the Tories have tripled the national debt since 2010. It has been an unmitigated disaster and the polls now thankfully show almost 60 per cent in favour of Rejoin. People now know what "Getting Brexit Done" actually means. The electorate were conned and those who voted for it, and Johnson in 2019, are now showing a large dose of remorse. Another aspect of this ridiculous Brexit wild goose chase has been the expulsion of all the remotely sensible Tory MPs. Johnson purged the best and many are now retiring in the face of what hopefully will be a major electoral reckoning for this disgraceful useless shell of a party. The Tories are now identifiable only as being an anti-immigration party, led by second generation immigrants when the country is desperately crying out for - well yes, immigration! And this needs also to be said. The country is now reaping what Thatcher sowed. The things that really matter to households - the cost of energy, water, food, banking, housing and communications, are all beyond our control, have been sold off and are subject to rigged markets and large corporate interests. The marginal improvements that Sunak appeals for to save his backside - in tax and interest rates - are but chaff in the wind. The Thatcher Tory legacy is structures of business that rip us off and these are not going away. They require the type of interventions Corbyn was promoting in 2019 - the break up of vested interests and the imposition of corporate articles forcing them to serve the people, not their shareholders. V Hallam seems to think I have an axe to grind. I don't. I just read and research stuff, and form my analysis from this. If s/he does the same then the same conclusions should be reached. Dr Andrew Golland, Leicester Graphic    LEGACY OF LOSSES: The policies and politics of Margaret Thatcher are still being felt today, says one of our correspondents pa Load-Date: April 12, 2024  End of Document
