   Tories warn Keir Starmer will 'take Britain back to Brexit bickering' as it's revealed EU will offer Labour leader a 'big opportunity' to 'reset' relations with Brussels if he reaches No10 MailOnline February 23, 2024 Friday 5:20 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 630 words Byline: Greg Heffer, Political Correspondent For Mailonline Body   Senior Tories today claimed Sir Keir Starmer will take Britain 'back to square one and having arguments about Brexit all over again' if the Labour leader reaches No10.  The warnings came after it was revealed the EU is ready to offer Sir Keir a 'big opportunity' to 'reset' the UK's relationship with Brussels if he wins power. Britain's trade deal with the EU, known as the Trade and Cooperation Agreement, is set for a review in May 2026 after five full years of implementation. According to the i newspaper, EU leaders are targeting the scheduled review as a chance to tie Britain into a closer trading relationship. Sir Keir, who previously backed a second Brexit referendum, has already publicly promised to seek a rewrite of the UK's trade deal if he becomes prime minister. It is reported a closer UK-EU trading relationship could include joint rules for car safety standards, food and plant checks, and financial services.  One senior European diplomat told the newspaper: 'The 2026 review of the Trade and Co-operation Agreement is a big opportunity for Starmer, potentially. 'If they decide to leave it to the bureaucracy, it will be very technical. But if there is political will to make real changes to the relationship then that will be extremely significant. It all depends on the political momentum of a new government.' Another EU source said: 'The potential future government of this country is looking at ways through which it can get closer rather than further away from Europe - especially in a geopolitical context that will most likely change a lot internationally, if [Donald] Trump as it seems likely will be in the White House. 'If, as [shadow Chencellor] Rachel Reeves says, growth is the answer to the current economic malaise of the UK, to grow you need better trade relations with the EU. 'It is half of this country's trade, so it is the easy way to improve the economic situation significantly.' The source suggested Britain and the EU could strike a deal on financial services as well as the imports of live animals. Sir Keir has ruled out rejoining the EU's single market or customs union if he leads a Labour government.  But Tory ministers claimed the Labour leader could reverse that position should he become PM after the general election. Trade minister Greg Hands posted on Twitter: 'I have long predicted that Labour will seek to enter into a customs union (or similar arrangement) with the EU, if they ever come into power. 'After all, this was Sir Keir Starmer's own policy before the 2019 election, when he was shadow Brexit secretary.' And Business and Trade Secretary Kemi Badenoch wrote: 'Greg is right. Parliament spent three years deciding the right Brexit strategy. 'There have been challenges, but the strategy is delivering dividends as my department reported earlier this month. 'A vote for Labour takes us back to square one and having arguments about Brexit all over again.' Nick Thomas-Symonds, Labour's shadow Cabinet Office minister, said: 'The Labour Party wants to make Brexit work.  'We would aim to improve the UK's trade and investment relationship with Europe, including trying to negotiate a veterinary agreement to help tackle food inflation. 'With war in Europe and increasing threats, Labour would seek to strike UK-EU defence and security pact to complement NATO and strengthen European security, as well as better co-ordination of policing to smash criminal people-smuggling gangs. 'This would be within the Labour Party's clear red lines, of no return to the customs union, the single market or freedom of movement. 'An incoming Labour government will reset relations with key European allies. 'The wider Trade and Co-operation Agreement review could provide an opportunity to address some of the shortcomings in the Conservatives' deal.' Load-Date: February 23, 2024  End of Document
