   TORY MPS WARN VOTING FOR REFORM UK WILL KILL BREXIT; DUNCAN SMITH'S STARK WARNING EXCLUSIVE The Express March 30, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,4,5 Length: 985 words Byline: Steph Spyro ; Katie Harris Body   SIR Iain Duncan Smith warns voting for Reform UK would push Britain back into the grip of the European Union. The former Tory leader said that Richard Tice's party will "simply strip votes away" from the Conservatives - and give Labour a majority government able to "bulldoze" laws through Parliament. Sir Keir Starmer wants to build a closer trading relationship with the EU if he wins the election. Sir Iain went on: "As someone who voted against the Maastricht Treaty in the 1990s, and against every single additional treaty following that, and as someone who was deeply involved in the Brexit campaign, I have of course sympathy for those who are frustrated that the pace of change has not happened as they had hoped. "Whilst some significant things have been delivered, there is yet much more to be done. There is, of course, still more to be done to take advantage of the flexibility and independence that Brexit provides. "Despite that frustration, we need to look at the reality of what could happen at the next election. "Any vote for Reform is taking away only from the Tories. If you want to re-enter the European Union and if you want to align closer to Europe - as Labour plans to do - if you want to have an unsustainable rush to net zero with extra taxes and regulations, then if you vote Reform, that is exactly what you will get." Sir Iain continued: "You will get a Labour government with a large majority that will be able to bulldoze anything they want through. "All of the things that anyone who votes for Reform stands for will be lost. The only hope they've got is a Conservative Party that gets on and does what is necessary. To do that, they need another mandate." Defence Secretary Grant Shapps insisted that "a vote for Reform is a vote for Labour" and risks "irrevocable damage" to Britain. The Tory MP for Welwyn Hatfield said: "As Conservatives we stand for decency, for helping Britain's hardworking families, for providing fairness and opportunity and for protecting this country and our allies. "This year will see a generationdefining general election which will shape the UK for decades to come. "If Labour gets into power, they will cause irrevocable damage to our economy, to our communities and to the fabric of the society we cherish. Conservative voters should know how important it is that we stand together. We have a plan and it is working. Labour has no clue, no plan and would take us back to square one if they won power. "For people considering a protest vote for Reform or others, remember that only the Conservatives can change this country for the better, not a party that will only ever be able to shout from the sidelines." A YouGov survey has put Reform UK on track to pick up 16% of the vote, with the Tories scoring 21% and Labour on 40%. Esther McVey, minister for common sense, warned that voting Reform would put Sir Keir in No 10 where he will be able to "implement a socialist agenda". arned uld re ement She said: "There are two ways of ensuring we have a Labour government after the next election - one is by voting Labour and the t votthe other is by voting Reform. Is that really what Reform voters want to be inflicted upon the country? th wi Conservativ Labou "There will either be a Conservative government, or a Labour government led by Sir Flip Flop and Angela Rayner. "Does anyone really think taxes will be lower under them? Does anyone think immigration will be lower? That they will be tougher on crime? Of course taxe them imm lower b c not. We all get frustrated, but an election is a clear choice. "Anyone who votes Reform is handing Starmer the keys to Downing Street where he will be able to implement a socialist agenda with impunity." Ms McVey, Tory MP for Tatton, accepted her party has not delivered all its 2019 manifesto pledges. But her colleague Damian Green said Tories had cut national insurance, halved inflation and are growing the economy: "Most importantly, we are protecting our borders and getting flights off to Rwanda. Reform is only focused on stoking division among society, not prioritising the needs of this country. A vote for them is a vote for the damaging consequences of Keir Starmer and Labour's inexistent plan for the nation." At a gathering in Salisbury last week, MP Danny Kruger told the New Conservatives group the party brand was "somewhat tarnished". He added Reform was "absolutely killing" the Tories and said he was "very, very worried" about growing support for the emerging party. Mr Kruger was heard being asked if the Tories should work with Reform UK. According to a leaked recording, he said: "I don't think there's any chance of working together because they've ruled that out. I think genuinely their ambition is to replace us. They want to destroy the Conservative Party. "They think the obstacle to Conservatism is the Conservative Party. And I kind of get what they're saying. Because in many ways it is, we're not a very conservative party in lots of ways." Labour has called on Rishi Sunak to publicly rule out offering a deal to Reform's honorary president Nigel Farage if he does not stand for the party in the election. Tory MPs, nervous about Reform UK, have reportedly urged the PM to make former Brexit Party leader Mr Farage the UK ambassador to the US or give him a peerage to stop him boosting Reform's push. Reform UK rejected that as an "electoral bribe" and a sign of the Tories' "desperation". Former Tory deputy chairman LeeAnderson MP defected to Reform this month. Asked if a vote for it was a vote for Labour, he said: "I thought that at one stage not that long ago but things have changed dramatically. "If there was a general election tomorrow and there was no Reform party who would win? The Labour Party would win by a landslide so that argument is now complete nonsense." OPINION: PAGE 14 'I have sympathy for voters frustrated that the pace of Brexit change has not happened as they had hoped' Graphic    Worry...Danny Kruger erAlert...Sir Iain urges voters to trust Tories; inset left, Richard Tice greets Lee AndersonPictures: KEN MCKAY/ITV/REX AND THOMAS KRYCH/ZUMA PRESS Load-Date: March 30, 2024  End of Document
