   Tourists flee from Hunt's tax; The chancellor's scrapping of duty-free shopping for foreign visitors was intended to save money. But as Jim Armitage finds on a visit to Bicester Village, the opposite could in fact be true The Sunday Times (London) May 12, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS AND MONEY;BUSINESS; Pg. 2,3 Length: 1741 words Byline: Jim Armitage Body   'Get rid of the tax! Tell them to get rid of the tax!" In the hushed environment of Paul Smith in the Oxfordshire fashion mecca of Bicester Village, an elegant Malaysian Chinese shopper accosted me. A seeming combination of Botox and plucked eyebrows made her look simultaneously surprised and angry. For the latter, she had good reason. It was 1.30pm and my assailant, who'd overheard that I was a journalist interviewing big-spending tourists, had already accrued a collection of huge bags from Fendi, Marni, Boss, Alexander McQueen ("60 per cent off") and Coach. So far, she'd burnt through at least £2,000. That meant, I calculated, that she had spent at least £400 more in VAT than she would have done the last time she shopped in Britain, the year before Brexit. "Exactly!" she said. "It's so stupid! Get rid of it!" It's fair to say that Britain's Brexit changes to the duty-free regime have not been universally popular. In 2020, Rishi Sunak, who was then the chancellor, had a big decision to make. With Britain leaving the European Union, we would no longer in the bloc's VAT system, whereby Europeans pay the local VAT but non-EU visitors could claim it back, "duty-free". Under World Trade Organisation rules, Sunak's choice was binary: either extend duty-free to the EU - allowing the French, Spanish and Germans the same shopping advantages as our Chinese, American and Arab visitors - or scrap it for everybody. Told by Treasury mandarins that the cost to the Exchequer of extending it would be £1.4 billion a year in lost taxes, Sunak decided the country could not afford it. Duty-free was abolished; the so-called tourist tax was born. As a result, Britain is pretty much the only major tourist destination that has such a heavy tax on foreigners who shop here. According to the hundreds of British shops, hotels, restaurants and manufacturers that rely on tourist spending, that one stroke of a pen in No 11 has cost the Exchequer, and them, billions as tourists have opted to spend their holiday money in Paris, Milan and, increasingly, Madrid, where they effectively get a 20 per cent discount on Britain. The data appears to back up that view. Spending by tourists in shops in the UK fell by 28 per cent in 2022 on 2019 levels, according to the lobbying group the Association of International Retail (AIR), while spending in France, Italy and Spain increased to 98 per cent above 2019 levels. The AIR calculates that this represented a loss of £1.5 billion of international visitors' retail spending in 2022. The biggest slump has been from the Chinese, UK retailers say. While Chinese tourists spend an average of $1,350 per person, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council, they are extremely price-sensitive; more so than Americans and those from the Gulf states. They will go where the best bargains are to be had. While Chinese international travel has only recently begun to reopen after Covid, there is mounting evidence that tourists are opting out of their UK trips, or at least cutting back their stays here to spend more time on the Continent. Thierry Andretta, chief executive of Mulberry, the British luxury goods group, said the decline in non-EU tourist numbers was one of the biggest factors behind his decision to close its flagship shop in Bond Street, central London, last year. "It was simply not viable. We lost about £11.3 million in sales and the end of dutyfree was the main reason," he said. "Everyone has lost trade, particularly from China." Data last week from Global Blue, a Swiss tax rebate provider that used individual passport numbers for its research, provided clear evidence of how Britain is losing out. It identified 34,000 tourists who had done duty-free shopping only in the UK in 2019 who were now doing it in the EU. Of those, 35 per cent were spending in France, 32 per cent in Italy and 13 per cent in Spain. They had increased their average spend from (EURO)2,900 in 2019 to (EURO)3,800 (£3,272). Bicester, or "The Village", as its fans call it, is a slice of London's chi-chi Bond Street deposited in the middle of a field by the London-Oxford rail route. A kind of Disneyland for label lovers, it is a movie-set reconstruction of a clapperboard New England settlement where every tenant is a mega fashion brand offering big reductions. Business felt brisk on a sunny Thursday afternoon, with a largely Asian and Middle East clientele, plus a smattering of Brits accessorising with spruced-up miniature dogs. The Brits are a high-fashion crowd, including Nicholas Alexander, a London-based model and Commes des Garçons devotee in primary colours and a spectacular beard, who was shopping with his mother, Margaret. "We just love the designers," she said. "Not all of them," he corrected. Some had multiple shopping bags hanging off their arms like bangles, but many of the international crowd had brought big, wheelie suitcases to fill. Eleanor Lam, a polite, 28-year-old Hong Konger, arrived dressed in Adidas Samba trainers, frayed denim flares and Moncler jacket. She was on a five-day trip to visit friends in London and Salzburg, Austria. The duty-free change was big news back home, she said: "For Chinese people who come to Europe just to shop it makes a really big difference, particularly on the big items. They're spending less time in Britain and more elsewhere." But what of Cool Britannia and our Harry Potter-Harry Styles creativity? She shrugged: "If you're shopping in the big department stores in Paris or Madrid, it's the same as London, but now they're 20 per cent cheaper." Of the dozens of shoppers I spoke to, the only ones from mainland China were students living in London who would never have qualified for VAT discounts before anyway. It's a far cry from the duty-free days, when Chinese shoppers would arrive with their empty Samsonites, load them up, then go to the Samsonite store and buy another to fill. Having spent the day shopping, they would queue up at the tax-free office late into the night to get their 20 per cent back. That has all gone, said Robyn Johnson, the 36-year-old store manager at Annoushka, the upmarket London jeweller. Johnson, whose family decamped from her native Zimbabwe to the UK when she was a girl, has worked in Bicester for ten years, commuting from nearby Silverstone. With a kohl-eyed 1960s look and bold-print flared romper suit, she holds her own among the fashionistas browsing the £11,000 gold necklaces under her command. Steering us to a discreet private sales room equipped with champagne for bigspending Americans and Brits, and glasses of tea for Arabs, she said the VAT changes had been a "huge deal" for her customers. "It used to be that international visitors were the majority here at the village. But since Brexit, Covid and then this VAT change, it's flipped from 40 per cent domestic and 60 per cent international to completely the other way round." Critics of duty-free say it is a costly tax break for rich foreigners, but Johnson rejects the criticism. "It's frustrating," she said. "These aren't the super-rich, they're people who love coming to this country and they want to spend their money here. They could go anywhere else in the world but they want to come here and buy British products like ours, so why are we trying to put them off?" Bicester's owner, Value Retail, is doing just fine. It has outlet villages in Spain, Italy and Paris, which are booming, while its UK division has tilted its marketing towards British customers. The absence of Chinese visitors is the most noticeable, Johnson said. "Before, we used to have coaches and coaches of Chinese clients dropped off here every day; it was like a conveyor belt of coaches. Now it's one or two coaches a week." Sometimes customers who have not visited since Brexit do not know the VAT deal is now off. Johnson said only last week she lost a sale to a Qatari couple when they learnt of it. While most of the shoppers I spoke to were aware (and cross) not all were. In the queue to enter Dolce & Gabbana, a patriarch from Delhi, waiting to pick up the tab for his wife and two boys, was visibly shaken when I told him. "But that is the big attraction," he stammered. Ali and Eannam Al-Hindal from Kuwait, visiting with their baby grandson, made for an elegant trio; she in flowing silk Prada while Ali and the baby paired up in matching Lacoste. Eannam was all smiles, until I raised the duty-free question: "We need to buy more clothes for him," she said, gesturing to the buggy. "But we went to Paris last year and definitely spent more there." The tourist industry says the Treasury has got its sums spectacularly wrong. They say it wildly overestimated the amount of shopping EU citizens would do in the UK if duty-free were reinstated (so, overstating the amount of "lost" tax) and greatly underestimated the impact on non-EU tourist spending here (understating the potential tax windfall). The difference is vast. While the government says imposing duty-free would cost the Exchequer £1.4 billion, the Association of International Retail says it would result in a gain of £450 million. Not only that, they say, but the Treasury is now starting to lose spending from its own people as Brits cotton on to the fact that they can do their shopping in Europe 20 per cent cheaper with dutyfree. European cities are now actively marketing that fact to British shoppers as a "Brexit dividend". Eurostar even has duty-free refund machines for British tourists returning from France, Mulberry's Andretta said. Conversely, the Association of International Retail says, extending duty-free to EU countries and Britain could create a new shopping-led tourist economy from scratch, potentially worth £10 billion a year, or £1 billion in new VAT receipts and £3.7 billion in indirect tax revenues from the extra employment and other factors. On the platform as I waited to head back to London, two teenage girls from Jordan whose train had just pulled in raced ahead of their family to film themselves by the station sign for their Instagrams. With an instantly choreographed dance, they sang: "Welcome to Bicester Village!" Their mother, Prada sunglasses raised up on the silk veil covering her forehead, was less enthused: "We used to get 20 per cent off here, but not any more," she said. "We love the shopping, but next time we'll spend more time in Paris." We went to Paris last year and spent much more there We've lost about £11.3m in sales - everyone has lost trade Graphic    Dedicated followers of fashion: Ali and Eannam Al-Hindal from Kuwait, above, and Nicholas Alexander and his mother, Margaret, from LondonILLUSTRATION: TONY BELL Load-Date: May 12, 2024  End of Document
