   Trade deal set to be delayed after u.k. poll blows South China Morning Post May 22, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 South China Morning Post Ltd.All Rights Reserved Section: ASIA; Pg. 10 Length: 841 words Byline: Biman Mukherji , biman.mukherji@scmp.com Highlight: Election reversals for PM Rishi Sunak are latest setback to agreeing post-Brexit arrangement previously hampered by changing ministers Body   An ambitious trade deal between India and Britain is likely to be delayed until a general election is held to form a new UK government, observers say, amid political uncertainty after British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak suffered a string of defeats in local polls.   Sunak's Conservative Party lost control of 10 councils and more than 470 council seats. The party also ceded 10 police and crime commissioners to Labour, which could undermine its election campaign.  "Successive British prime ministers have been claiming the UK's largest trade deal post-Brexit was imminent with India. This hasn't happened because the ministerial personnel on the UK side kept on changing, including several prime ministers," said Pratik Dattani, founder of London-based think tank Bridge India.  "It is more likely that this [trade deal] will be concluded after the general election," he said of the agreement hailed as a shot in the arm for trade between both sides. The proposed deal would be one of the key discussion points at an India Week event to be held in London in early July.  Britain's next general election must be held no later than January 2025, which will determine the composition of the House of Commons and the next UK government. In January, Sunak said he expected to go to the polls "in the second half" of this year.  The trade deal could offer Britain greater access to India's vast market - partially compensating new restrictions on trade with the European Union post-Brexit - while India could benefit from a reduction of duties and non-trade barriers, boosting exports.  Bilateral trade between India and Britain in 2022-23 was US$20.36 billion, up from US$17.5 billion in 2021-22, according to data from the Indian govern­­ment.  Brexit, Britain's withdrawal from the EU in January 2020, weakened the UK's economic growth and distracted politicians from basic policymaking for several years, Dattani said.  The local election losses have strengthened expectations that the Conservative Party could make way for Labour, which is likely to spell a period of uncertainty for Britain's trade deals.  "The Labour Party has not said how it will engage with India," Dattani said.  Other observers say the UK faces some hard choices post- Brexit.  Upbeat sentiment in the immediate aftermath of Britain's withdrawal from the EU about London being able to set its own tariffs and strike global trade deals appeared to have waned, said Priyajit Debsarkar, a London-based British-Indian author.  "It is now safe to conclude that the vision of a global Britain has fallen flat and exit from the union has failed to transform the country into an economic superpower," he said.  India and Britain launched negotiations in January 2022 to remove a number of trade barriers and work towards a free-trade agreement. Former UK prime minister Boris Johnson had de­clared that the agreement would be completed by the Indian festival of Diwali in October 2022.  "The best way forward is to go step by step, starting with the easy aspects first and then go to the more difficult aspects," said Rami Ranger, a Conservative member of the UK parliament.  The tougher portions of the deal include things such as transfer of technology in sensitive industries. "We should not go for an all-or-nothing approach," Ranger said. But he added that political uncertainty was unlikely to materially affect the deal.  "The UK-India trade deal will be the mother of all deals. It will be between the fourth- and the fifth-largest economies and given the size of India's market, it will be a huge deal," Ranger said, adding that the agreement was more important to Britain than India.  The deal is expected to serve as a template for another trade agreement New Delhi has been working on with the EU. Besides exports of goods, the deals could determine export of services, such as India's pool of IT workers.  Though India's trade deal with Britain may be taking longer than expected, analysts expressed confidence that it would still happen.  "Yes, the Conservative Party may not come back to power, but the Labour Party won't ditch the trade deal," said T. S. Vishwanath, a trade analyst and principal adviser at international trade advisory ASL-Legal. "For the UK today, when they are not part of the EU, it becomes very important now to have trade deals with important countries if they want to engage with the world and remain relevant globally."  But discussions could "start all over again" should there be a new government in Britain, he said, adding that the Conservative Party might to try to push the deal through before the election.  Dattani, however, said that was unlikely because Sunak's government would need an electoral mandate to cement the move.   Delhi has recently reached free trade agreements with Australia and Mauritius.  India is also in the midst of a general election, with Prime Minister Narendra Modi's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party expected to return to power, although it remains to be seen whether it will need support from allied parties to form a government. Load-Date: May 21, 2024  End of Document
