   UK attacks EU double standards on migrants; Britain refuses to take back asylum seekers until France does same for Channel crossings Ireland 'must not provide loophole for migration claims' The Daily Telegraph (London) April 29, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE, TEASERS; Pg. 1,2 Length: 991 words Byline: Ben Riley-Smith; Genevieve Holl-Allen; Charles Hymas Body   THE Government has accused the EU of double standards after Ireland vowed to send asylum seekers to the UK despite France refusing to take back Channel migrants. The row erupted after senior Irish ministers said they would draft emergency laws to send back migrants who had arrived from the UK to avoid being deported to Rwanda. However, Tory ministers consider the proposal to be a "non-starter" because they are unable to send asylum seekers who arrive on small boats across the Channel back to France. A UK government source said: "We won't accept any asylum returns from the EU via Ireland until the EU accepts that we can send them back to France. "We are fully focused on operationalising our Rwanda scheme, and will continue working with the French to stop the boats from crossing the Channel." Today, the Home Office will start detaining asylum seekers to be deported to Rwanda, with the Government hoping that the first flights will take off in the summer. It comes as record numbers of migrants crossed the Channel this month, with Home Office figures yesterday showing numbers had passed 7,000 before the end of April for the first time. Last week, Lord Cameron, the Foreign Secretary, indicated that a migrant returns agreement with France was "simply not possible" after Brexit. He said "the situation we're in" meant a deal in place when he was prime minister to send migrants back to France could not be replicated. Last week, Micheal Martin, the Irish deputy prime minister, said the UK's Rwanda policy was "impacting on Ireland" because people were "fearful" of staying in the UK and were seeking asylum in Ireland instead. Following his comments, Helen McEntee, the Irish justice minister, revealed the plan to send asylum seekers back to the UK on RTE, the national broadcaster, yesterday. Simon Harris, the Irish prime minister, has asked that the proposals be brought to his cabinet this week as he faces growing public pressure over rising migration figures. Ms McEntee said: "My focus as minister for justice is making sure that we have an effective immigration structure and system. That's why I'm introducing fast processing. That's why I'll have emergency legislation at cabinet this week to make sure that we can effectively return people to the UK, and that's why I'll be meeting the Home Secretary [James Cleverly] to raise these issues on Monday." However, Mr Cleverly has cancelled the meeting, saying he had a diary clash. Chris Heaton-Harris, the Northern Ireland Secretary, is expected to meet senior Irish officials today and make the Government's position clear. Mr Heaton-Harris, who once chaired the European Research Group of Brexiteer Tory MPs, is meeting Mr Martin and Ms McEntee at the British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference in London. Lord Caine and Steve Baker, two other Northern Ireland ministers, are also attending. The Irish call for a tougher return agreement has triggered a backlash from some Tories. David Jones, a Tory MP and former Cabinet minister, said: "If they send them back, they will go back again because there is an open border. The Irish cannot have their cake and eat it. They wanted an open border, and they have an open border. "What it does underline is the effectiveness of the Rwanda policy. Clearly, Continued on Page 2 Editorial Comment: Page 17 Continued from Page 1 people are pre-empting that by moving to Ireland. "As far as I can see, the Irish government doesn't know how to address it. I don't think they ever foresaw a situation like this would arise." Immigration to Ireland rose by 32 per cent in the year ending last April, with asylum seekers accounting for more than 13,000 of over 140,000 arrivals. The influx comes amid a shortfall of Irish homes and huge rents, with a poll by the Business Post/Red C finding last year that 74 per cent of Irish voters believed the country had taken in "too many refugees". Mr Harris said: "Every country is entitled to have its own migration policy, but I certainly don't intend to allow anybody else's migration policy to affect the integrity of our own one. "This country [Ireland] will not, in any way, shape or form, provide a loophole for anybody else's migration challenges. That's very clear." Before Brexit, the return of migrants to EU countries was governed by the Dublin Agreement, under which migrants could be sent back to a safe third country through which they had passed before arriving at their destination. This meant asylum seekers arriving in Ireland from the UK, or migrants reaching the UK from France could be returned if it could be shown that they had passed through a safe third country - that is, the UK or France. But the UK left the scheme when it departed the EU and no successor agreement was signed during the Brexit talks. A post-Brexit provision was, however, made in the case of the UK and Ireland, which meant Ireland could return asylum seekers to www.Britain.No asylum seeker has been successfully returned to Ireland, or vice-versa, under this post-Brexit arrangement since it was struck. However, the Irish High Court last month ruled that the Irish Government's declaration of the UK as a "safe third country" to which it could return asylum seekers was unlawful owing to the Rwanda Bill. The emergency legislation proposal seeks to overturn this judgment. Any returns agreement would face the challenge of how it would work, as asylum seekers returned to the UK could simply walk back into Ireland over the land border with Northern Ireland. On Monday the Home Office will launch a nationwide operation to detain asylum seekers for deportation to Rwanda after the new law came into force last week. Immigration teams are primed to pick up people earmarked for deportation and detain those who turn up for routine check-ins at Home Office asylum centres. They will be transferred to immigration detention centres, where Mr Sunak said last week that 2,200 spaces have been allocated for migrants to be held. Graphic    Activists take part in an antiimmigration march in Newtown Mount Kennedy, Ireland, yesterday Load-Date: April 29, 2024  End of Document
