   United Kingdom: left turn? CE Noticias Financieras English May 14, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 962 words Body   Everything seems to indicate that the United Kingdom will have its first left-wing government since 2010. After a series of Conservative Party administrations, several signs point to a Labour Party landslide in this year's elections. The most recent of these signs appeared this month. In the regional elections, held in different parts of the country a few days ago, the Conservatives were mercilessly thrashed by Labor. The party of the current prime minister lost around 400 local positions, city councils, regional governments and key parts of London. This result is disastrous for the Conservatives. To their misfortune, it is also consistent with a sentiment that goes beyond local areas. Polls indicate that, as of today, the Labour Party would get about 43% of the vote in a general election, while the ruling Conservative Party would not get more than 24%; this means that not only would the new Prime Minister be Labour, but that party would have almost total control of the British Parliament. The Conservative Party debacle is not only impressive, it is also pronounced. Just in 2019, led then by Boris Johnson, the Conservatives wrested 66 seats in Parliament from Labour. This Conservative victory was the biggest since Margaret Thatcher's triumph (1987); it also involved the capture of regions that were traditionally Labour and which, in theory, should have voted for the left. To top it off, this phenomenon has occurred without a major project or attractive Labour candidacy. Keir Starmer, the current leader of that party, lacks charisma and has opted for a strategy that, broadly speaking, consists of not stirring the waters too much. When an issue is controversial, Starmer usually chooses to avoid it. He has also adopted a moderate approach that sometimes veers towards centrism, rather than radical transformations. Consequently, the Conservatives' collapse is not primarily due to a renewed national fervor in favor of their rivals. To understand this phenomenon, it is necessary to consider the conjunction of three closely interrelated factors. The first is the continuing crisis left by the neoliberal policies promoted for decades by Conservative governments. The British population has been the victim of constant cuts in health, education and fundamental services. With the state dwarfed, whole areas have been virtually abandoned. This state of affairs is important, as the Conservative campaign in 2019 had as its slogan "levelling upwards" the most neglected sectors. In that sense, the British right-wing party outflanked Labour on the left. But its promise has since failed to materialize. As a result, there is a rightly disenchanted section of the population. The second is Brexit. To a large extent the Conservatives crushed Labour five years ago by promoting the election as a referendum on another referendum - Brexit. In 2016 the majority of voters, encouraged by populist Conservatives and the far right, opted for their country's exit from the European Union. Three years later, Johnson campaigned promising to deliver on that mandate to the letter. Labour, then led by Jeremy Corbyn, feared taking the opposite position and ended up disappointing both sides. But the public's attitude to Brexit has changed. According to The Economist, currently around 60% of the population thinks it was a mistake to have left the European bloc. And no wonder. Different indicators show that, as a consequence of Brexit, inflation and the economic effects of the pandemic have been especially hard in the United Kingdom. In other words, leaving the European bloc has been markedly counterproductive, and the public knows it. The third factor has to do with the scandals of the Boris Johnson government and its successors, including the current Prime Minister Rishi Sunak. With his buffoonish style and the aura of a landslide victory, Johnson felt untouchable. But that overconfidence led Boris Johnson to commit serious misdemeanors, such as violating his own pandemic rules or appointing a person with sexual harassment allegations to a key position. What the public found unforgivable, however, was that Boris Johnson chose to lie in both cases, and that he confessed only after being exposed. Given that in the UK the prime minister is elected by the party with the most members in parliament, Johnson's fall was followed by another Conservative government. Supported by the most backward wing of her party, Liz Truss was appointed prime minister, but she was in office for less than two months. Truss's downfall stemmed from a budget proposal that implied, in the midst of a crisis in British living standards, cutting taxes for the richest. Nor did it help him to anger a majority section of his party by excluding them from his government. The current Prime Minister's inability to improve the British economy has not won him many supporters. In addition, Sunak has leaned on far-right groups and defended inhumane migration policies, such as deporting immigrants, regardless of their nationality, to Rwanda (just as you read it). The above three factors - neoliberalism, Brexit and reprehensible governments - explain the results of the local elections a few days ago. They also help to understand why the Conservatives have handed Labour a parliamentary majority on a silver platter. It follows that there is not much room for doubt. Unless something extraordinary happens, Keir Starmer will be the next British Prime Minister. He will do so, as we have seen, by adopting a cautious stance and without promising radical transformations. What remains to be seen is whether this approach will be enough for Labour to make the shift to the left that their country so badly needs. *Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Nottingham, UK.  Load-Date: May 15, 2024  End of Document
