   US, UK politics not in step this timeAs elections near, parallels to 2016 may be superficial The Hartford Courant May 26, 2024 Sunday 1 Edition  Copyright 2024 The Hartford Courant Company All Rights Reserved Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 4 Length: 901 words Byline: Mark Landler The New York Times Highlight: British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak, seen at the White House, called for a general election July 4. Doug Mills/The New York Times 2023 Body   LONDON - A Conservative British prime minister sets the date for a long-awaited vote in the early summer and the United States follows with a momentous presidential election a few months later. It happened in 2016, when Britons voted for Brexit and Americans elected Donald Trump, and now it's happening again. Political soothsayers might be tempted to study the results of Britain's July 4 general election for clues about how the United States might vote Nov. 5. In 2016, after all, the country's shock vote to leave the European Union came to be seen as a canary in the coal mine for Trump's surprise victory later that year. Yet this time, the past may not be a prologue. British voters appear poised to elect the opposition Labour Party over the beleaguered Conservatives, while in the United States, a Democratic president, Joe Biden, is in a dogfight with Trump and his Republican Party. "We're just in a very different place politically than the U.S. right now," said Robert Ford, a professor of political science at the University of Manchester. The Conservatives have been in power for 14 years, Brexit has faded as a political issue, and there is no British equivalent to Trump. To the extent that there is a common theme on both sides of the Atlantic, said Ben Ansell, a professor of comparative democratic institutions at Oxford University, "it's really bad to be an incumbent." By all accounts, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak decided to call an election a few months early because he does not expect Britain's economic news to get any better between now and the fall. Sunak, trailing Labour by more than 20 percentage points in polls, is betting that the Tories can cut their losses by facing the voters now, analysts said. There is little evidence that the American political calendar played into Sunak's decision, but holding an election on July 4 has the ancillary benefit of avoiding any overlap. If he had waited until mid-November, as political oddsmakers had predicted, he would have risked being swept up in the aftermath of the American results. Political analysts were already debating whether a victory by Trump would benefit the Conservatives or Labour. Some postulated that Sunak could seize on the disruption of another Trump presidency as a reason to stick with the Tories, if only because they might get along better with Trump than Labour's leader, Keir Starmer. Now that is irrelevant: Britain will have a new Parliament, and very likely a new prime minister, before Republicans and Democrats even hold their conventions. Still, Britain's election results could hold lessons for the United States, analysts said. The countries remain politically synchronized on many issues, whether it is anxiety about immigration, anger about inflation or clashes over social and cultural issues. "Imagine there is a collapse of the Conservatives, like in Canada in 1993," Ansell said, referring to a federal election in which the incumbent Progressive Conservative Party was all but wiped out by the Liberals and even elbowed aside by the Reform Party as Canada's major right-wing party. Britain's Conservatives face a milder version of that threat from Reform U.K., a party co-founded by populist Nigel Farage that is running on an anti-immigration message. In the latest poll by YouGov, a market research firm, Reform was at 14%, while the Conservatives were at 22% and Labour at 44%. A surging Reform U.K., Ansell said, "might be a sign that populism is back on the rise in the U.K. and could be an omen and portent that the same might happen in the fall in the U.S." Conversely, he said, major gains by Britain's center-left parties - Labour, as well as the Liberal Democrats and the Greens - might reassure Democrats that their better-than-expected results in midterm and special elections were not a fluke but part of a larger global swing. Some right-wing critics blame the Conservative Party's decline on the fact that it has drifted from the economic nationalism that fueled the Brexit vote and the party's victory in 2019 under then-Prime Minister Boris Johnson. The Tories' embrace of liberal free-market policies has, they said, put them out of step with Trump's MAGA legions, as well as right-wing movements in Italy and the Netherlands. "Whatever you think about Trump - he's unstable, he's a danger to democracy - if you look at how he's polling, he's doing a hell of a lot better than the Tories are," said Matthew Goodwin, a professor of politics at the University of Kent. In his bid to mobilize the Conservative base, Sunak is sounding notes that echo the anti-immigrant themes of Brexit campaigners in 2016. He has spent much of his premiership promoting a plan to put asylum-seekers on one-way flights to Rwanda. Costly, much criticized and unrealized, it has more than a little in common with Trump's border wall. "This has been kind of our Trump moment," said Kim Darroch, a former British ambassador to Washington. "But given the legacy that Keir Starmer will inherit, you can't rule out someone from the right wing of the Tory Party exploiting a weak Labour government to get back into power in four or five years." For all its totemic importance, Brexit has scarcely figured as an issue in 2024. Analysts said that reflects voter exhaustion, a recognition among Tories that leaving the European Union harmed Britain's economy, and an acceptance that Britain is not rejoining anytime soon. Load-Date: May 26, 2024  End of Document
