   Varadkar foxed Britain's narrow stereotype of Irish The Irish Times March 28, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 The Irish Times All Rights Reserved Section: OPINION; Pg. 10 Length: 836 words Body   When Leo Varadkar resigned last week, the cynics emerged: his domestic record is a profound housing crisis; a weary Fine Gael dragging its heels dispiritedly towards an election; a country divided over immigration policy and precipitous demographic change. Some criticism is fair, although Ireland is hardly a unique case study in the West right now when it comes to any of these questions.  But more importantly, Varadkar s true legacy is often forgotten: as Taoiseach he foisted a new version of Ireland onto the international stage.  Varadkar leaves office with his country as rich and European as ever,  writes Tom McTague in Unherd,  but he represents this new Ireland, much as Tony Blair represented new Britain.  This is true: Varadkar has become a symbol of Ireland s liberalised, cosmopolitan sensibilities. But we ought to go a step further: Varadkar did not just represent a new Ireland, he was not just a mere signifier of a new political reality. He brought it with him. Not all roads lead to Brexit but for Varadkar it is the salient place to start. At almost every turn he caught the Tories off guard; encouraging the party to accept his arguments on an open border at the earliest possible moment; seeing multiple prime ministers and iterations of the Conservative party confounded by Ireland and its centrality to the Brexit project. Between 2016 and 2023 (when the Windsor Framework was finally agreed) Ireland haunted the Tories. So did Varadkar. Perfect encapsulation  In truth, Varadkar had an easier job than the Tories. His mission was singular: protect and promote Ireland s national interest in the face of a Brexit that looked set to damage it. He was not aggressive but his manner was certainly clipped   a marked deviation from his lilting predecessor, Enda Kenny. Gently mocking Boris Johnson s grasp of classical mythology in 2019 outside Government Buildings became a perfect encapsulation of his attitude. In spite of what Westminster believed, Varadkar was not about to suffer fools gladly. Meanwhile, the Tories were faced with a spiritual (and Herculean) conundrum: they had to decide what version of Brexit to pursue amid hundreds of competing options; cobble together a coalition of support behind that vision; mediate the internal hostilities in a divided and constantly bickering party; suffer defeat after defeat under Theresa May; and redesign their ambitions under Johnson. The reality of Ireland s role in British politics was hard to accept. The Conservatives were nonetheless unprepared for a politician to pursue Ireland s national interest at Britain s cost. This psychology seems archaic but it was   in several quarters   the thinking behind the commanding heights of the Conservative establishment. In short: who on Earth does Varadkar think he is? In Britain s narrow stereotype of the Irish, Varadkar appeared an interloper too: gay, half-Indian, young. Varadkar was as personally subversive of British expectations as he was politically. Base prejudice  And in this, a base prejudice was revealed. The Tories were not just beholden to a naive assumption that the Irish would be incompetent negotiating partners. Rather, the real surprise was the very idea that Ireland was standing up for its own interests instead of abetting Britain s. A Sun editorial claimed that Varadkar would be responsible for  the potential chaos of a no-deal Brexit . The Telegraph alleged in 2019 that the backstop was  a contrived hoax  cooked up, in part, by Dublin. The faulty passage of Brexit was   it seemed   Varadkar s fault. This comes with the unavoidable subtext that the smooth passage of Brexit was somehow Varadkar s duty. Their mindset was glaringly obvious: Ireland, though notionally independent, was really a vassal state for British interests. On realisation that this was a dangerous assumption, a new slew of accusations emerged: Ireland was instead a puppet of the European Union; or perhaps a proxy for Washington. Only years later has the new reality been forced on the Tories. Ireland was no vassal, but instead a fully formed nation with soft power and a national interest distinct from that its neighbours. Varadkar is responsible for disabusing the Tories of this prejudice   for reminding them that Ireland is not too small to be anything but a useful fool when it comes to the big questions of the world. This was Varadkar s greatest impact. It is easy to bemoan myriad crises at home. Perhaps it is not wrong to suggest that Varadkar was always more comfortable   more interested   in being an international statesman than a domestic politician. This no doubt leaves a host of problems for the next government to clear up. But Varadkar was not just a passive symbol of a new Ireland. His realpolitik, refusal to conform to expedient stereotype and his ability to command begrudging respect heralded it. The Conservative party was slow to psychologically accept all of this. That they ever did in the first place is in no small part thanks to Ireland s trickiest taoiseach. Load-Date: March 28, 2024  End of Document
