   von der Leyen rebuked after urging young to 'fix Brexit'; LABOUR ACCUSED OF BACKING BRUSSELS OVER BRITAIN The Express November 30, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 676 words Byline: Martyn Brown Body   RISHI Sunak dismissed suggestions from EU chief Ursula von der Leyen that young people should reverse Brexit, with one senior Tory calling her remarks "nonsense". The Prime Minister insisted withdrawal has made Britain stronger, despite the European Commission President hinting the UK could soon be on a path to rejoining the bloc. Mr Sunak also lashed out at Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer, who has pledged to forge closer ties with the EU if he gets elected. The PM warned that Sir Keir will "back Brussels over Britain every single time". Tensions erupted after Ms von der Leyen suggested that Brexit was a mistake that needed to be "fixed". Asked whether Britain could ever rejoin the EU, the German politician told an event in Brussels: "I must say, I keep telling my children, 'You have to fix it. We goofed it up, you have to fix it'. "So I think here too, the direction of travel, my personal opinion, is clear." She also described the Windsor Framework, signed by her and Mr Sunak to address Northern Ireland's Brexit issues, as "a new beginning for old friends". Asked yesterday if Brexit was "in peril" and whether he agreed with the President's remarks, the PM's spokesman said: "No. It's through our Brexit freedoms that we are, right now, considering how to further strengthen our migration system. "It is through our Brexit freedoms we are ensuring patients in the UK can get access to medicines faster, that there is improved animal welfare. That is very much what we are focused on." - Brendan Clarke-Smith, deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, described Ms von der Leyen's remarks as "nonsense". ks s nderstand ple e grownd David Jones, a former minister, said: "Ms von der Leyen should understand that the British people are not children. They are grownups who decided to exercise their treaty y right to leave the EU." Mark Francois, chairman of the European Research Group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs, said Ms von der Leyen needed to "come to terms with Brexit". Referring to the EU's anthem, he said: "If Ursula von der Leyen thinks the UK is going to rejoin the creaking EU, she can go whistle Ode to Joy." criticis Gree Earlier, Mr Sunak tore into the Opposition leader over his desire to reverse Brexit. The attack came after the PM was criticised for not meeting with the Greek prime minister following a dispute over the Elgin Marbles - ancient stone sculptures from Greece held in the British Museum. Marb Br f Question In feisty exchanges during Prime Minister's Questions, Sir Keir said: "I discussed with the Greek prime minister the economy, mi security, immigration. I also told him we wouldn't change the law regarding the Marbles. It's not that difficult, Prime Minister." Mr Sunak hit back: "No one will be surprised that he's backing an EU country over Britain. Just this last week he was asked which song best sums up the Labour Party. Deal "What did he come up with? Well, he showed his true colours and chose Ode to Joy, literally the anthem of the European Union, and he will back Brussels over Britain every single time." The PM also warned Sir Keir's closer ties with Europe would result in more migrants coming to the UK. He told MPs Labour would do a "secret backroom deal with the EU that would see an additional 100,000 migrants here every year". Sir Keir has promised a major rewrite of the post-Brexit trading relationship if Labour wins the general election, set to be held next year. The party insists Britain won't be a "rule taker" if it negotiates a new deal. Mr Sunak moved to repair strained relations with the EU after he became Prime Minister in October 2022. He calculated that a closer relationship was necessary for economic reasons during the cost-of-living crisis and for geopolitical reasons after Vladimir Putin's invasion of Ukraine. The UK and EU were at loggerheads over the Irish Sea border until the Windsor Framework was agreed, which calmed tensions. Since then, Brussels has approved UK's post-Brexit participation in Horizon, its flagship research programme, and its Copernicus space programme. OPINION: PAGE 12 Graphic    Windsor deal...PM and von der LeyenCriti Critical...Mark FrancoisUnder fire...Sir Keir Starmer in Commons yesterdayRejoining claims... EU chief Ursula von der LeyenPictures: RISTO BOZOVIC/AP, Load-Date: November 30, 2023  End of Document
