   Von der Leyen: Britain should rejoin the EU to fix problems with 'goofed up' Brexit The Daily Telegraph (London) November 30, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1 Length: 297 words Byline: James Crisp Body   THE United Kingdom should rejoin the European Union to "fix" Brexit, Ursula von der Leyen has said, after Labour pledged to forge closer ties with the bloc if elected. The European Commission president said "we goofed it up" when asked if Britain could ever reverse Brexit. She was speaking on Tuesday night in Brussels amid much improved UK relations since the signing of Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland in February and after Nexitbacking Geert Wilders' shock victory in Dutch elections last week. "First of all, thank God. With the Windsor agreement, we had a new beginning for old friends. Very important," Mrs von der Leyen said at an event hosted by the Politico website. "And then I must say, I keep telling my children, you have to fix it. We goofed it up. You have to fix it. So I think here, too, the direction of travel, my personal opinion is clear." The Prime Minister's official spokesman said Mr Sunak did not agree with Mrs von der Leyen that future generations would have to fix Brexit. "No. It's through our Brexit freedoms that we are, right now, considering how to further strengthen our migration system," he said. "It is through our Brexit freedoms we are ensuring patients in the UK can get access to medicines faster, that there is improved animal welfare. "That is very much what we are focused on." There is no expectation that the UK will ask to rejoin the EU anytime soon, which is a lengthy and complex process that would take many years. But Sir Keir Starmer has promised a major rewrite of the post-Brexit trading relationship if Labour wins a general election, which is expected to be held next year. Mark Francois, the chairman of the European Research Group of eurosceptic Tory MPs, said Mrs von der Leyen needed to "come to terms with Brexit." Load-Date: November 30, 2023  End of Document
