   What are the new Brexit food checks and how do they affect you? The National (Scotland) January 30, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright 2024 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 473 words Byline: James Walker Body   The UK Government is unveiling a new Brexit border policy tomorrow which is set to increase red tape, disrupt supply chains and impact food prices across the UK. Westminster believes the new food checks will not significantly impact trade or increase costs for the public - despite delaying it five times amid a cost-of-living crisis - but that it will reduce the risk of importing harmful plant or animal diseases. Others believe differently- What are the new Brexit food checks and how do they work?  The so-called border target operating model (BTOM), which looks to mirror the same controls the EU has for UK companies trying to export to mainland Europe, makes an expensive veterinary certificate legally required with consignments of fresh food and plant imports from the EU. All imported plant and animal products from the EU will be categorised as either low, medium or high risk. Those seen as medium and high - which includes meat, dairy products and most plants - will require checks from plant health inspectors or vets. READ MORE: Post-Brexit border checks delayed for fifth time This will be a requirement from 00:01 GMT on Wednesday, with more significant changes on April 30 when products will be physically checked at new UK border posts. The UK Government has acknowledged that this will increase food prices by 0.2 percentage points over three years. What impact will the Brexit food checks have?  Businesses have raised concerns over a shortage of flowers for Valentine-s Day and the Fresh Produce Consortium has warned that fruit and vegetable imports will face a price hike of 200 million as a result of import controls - costs that will have to be passed onto consumers. Downing Street sought to provide reassurance. A Number 10 spokeswoman said: -I don-t think people should be worried, I-m sure people will be able to provide gifts to their loved ones on Valentine-s Day in the way that we always see.- Pressed if that extends to roses too, she said: -I-m sure people will be receiving bouquets of flowers on Valentine-s Day this year.- The SNP hit out at the checks, with their economy spokesperson saying Scotland-s businesses and consumers are paying the price of -broken, Brexit Britain-. Drew Hendry said: -Scotland-s consumers and businesses are paying a heavy price for a Brexit we never voted for, in the middle of a cost-of-living crisis made worse by the Tory government. -As a result of Brexit, Scotland faces an expected loss of 3 billion a year in public revenues and each person is predicted to face a cost of at least 2300 by 2035. On top of this, a recent report found that the average person in Scotland has missed out on 23,370 in disposable income - 13,170 higher than the UK average. -This is the cost of Westminster control for Scotland, it is the cost of broken Brexit Britain - we all deserve so much better.- Load-Date: January 30, 2024  End of Document
