   Without Brexit Humza is merely a sideshow blob Scottish Express January 22, 2024 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 767 words Byline: Alan Grant Body   WILL the real First Minister please stand up? Of the three SNP leaders to be First Minister, it can only be said of two of whom that we know exactly what they are "about". For Alex Salmond, it was securing the independence referendum and a centre-right pragmatism that sought to assure business and taxpayers that his hands were safe. He did, after all, team up with the genial Annabel Goldie of the Scottish Tories to get his budget through. A fact that has been conveniently memoryholed by the modern SNP. Nicola Sturgeon, before recent difficulties, represented a leftward shift in policy and a party that, far from slinking off after losing to the Better Together campaign, would fill stadiums and most of Scotland's seats across both Parliaments. All these facts were known about the former FMs early in their time in Scotland's highest political office. However, for the incumbent, Humza Yousaf, it's much harder to be so specific. Is he the businessman's friend who wants to create a buzzing little centre of excellence in the chilly North Atlantic? Is he the social justice activist, across all issues from Pollock to Palestine? Or is he the bridgebuilder, whose delicate touch allows Lorna Slater to continue spending a ministerial salary on whatever it is Scottish Greens spend their dosh on? Barring the external projects of managing the SNP's political decline and trudging his way through other people's scandals, it's difficult to say what Mr Yousaf's politics are. Barring, of course, breaking up Britain. It might be possible to paint Mr Yousaf as Britain's top anti-Brexit politician. He seems to want to be seen that way. Both Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak, and the next Prime Minister, Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer, are either pro-Brexit or at least not in favour of reversing it. Lib Dem boss Sir Ed Davey, while he may inherit the role after this year's UK General Election, is not 'it' simply through numbers. Mr Yousaf is the leader of Britain's third party, for now, and he's in favour of returning to the EU, ergo, he has a reasonable claim to being Britain's preeminent anti-Brexiteer. EXCEPT, is he really? I am not for a minute suggesting Mr Yousaf is pro-Brexit but I am questioning where his supposed Remain credentials come from. Because, as with most of his stripe, there is a bigger constitutional commitment that overrides everything else. I propose a counterfactual. It's 7.20am on 24 June, 2016 and Electoral Commission Chairwoman Jenny Watson stands in Manchester Town Hall and declares the result of the British people's vote on leaving the EU. She announces that, with its arguments about togetherness, fairness, and internationalism, the Remain campaign has won. Nigel Farage is saddened but congratulates the winners. Nick Clegg's face beams out from TVs across the country. Boris Johnson and Michael Gove retreat to the backbenches and David Cameron remains in No10. The numbers are clear. Wales mostly voted for Brexit but majorities in England, Scotland, and Northern Ireland carry the day. Now, skip ahead to 2023 and let's assume the election is being held at the same time. The SNP continues to attempt to hang on to power in Scotland and most of Scotland's Westminster seats. But their campaigning is very different. It's about energy and public spending, and a little bit of 'why are you bombing Yemen?' but there is no Brexit which, in our timeline, forms the cornerstone of the SNP's campaigning. The great trick nationalism in Scotland has managed to get away with is persuading much of this country it is a pro-EU, left-of-centre, progressive ideology by default. This is in part due to the memory hole that includes terms like "Celtic Tiger", "arc of prosperity", "grasping the thistle", and "nearly half of us voted for Tartan Tory Kate Forbes". SCOTTISH nationalism is an amorphous blob that fits into whatever is popular now to sell the single thing that it cares about, breaking up the UK. All the other principles that are paired with it at the time are mere side dishes. This is why it is hard to take Yousaf's anti-Brexit credentials seriously. Using Brexit to argue for independence is only logical if you would have used a Remain vote to argue against it. Had that happened, is it likely that we would now be talking about Humza Unionist? Hardly. This is perhaps a broader issue with nationalism. It shapeshifts into whatever is convenient to sell its snake oil. But, if you choose to become a shapeshifter, Mr Yousaf, don't start getting upset when people start to doubt your commitment to any particular shape. 'I am questioning where his Remain credentials come from' Graphic    WHO ME?... There are doubts Humza Yousaf is the Pro-EU leader he claims he is Load-Date: January 22, 2024  End of Document
