   Young Britons would regain right to work in Europe under new plan The Times (London) April 19, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 587 words Byline: Oliver Wright ;Bruno Waterfield Body   Britons under the age of 30 would be allowed to live and work in Europe for up to four years under an EU plan to improve post-Brexit youth mobility. The European Commission said that it wanted to negotiate an agreement with Britain that would create a "right" for young people on both sides of the Channel to travel abroad for longer. Under the proposals, published yesterday, anyone aged 18-30 would be eligible for a visa that would permit travel to one EU country for up to four years to work, study or volunteer. At present, Britons wishing to stay longer than 90 days must apply for a work, education or resident's visa, a complicated, bureaucratic process that varies from country to country. Brussels also wants EU students to be treated like British students, avoiding expensive international fees at British universities. The move appears to be designed to appeal to Labour if it forms a government. The party has pledged to prioritise improving Britain's Brexit deal but denied plans for a youth mobility scheme. The EU's proposals could create a dilemma for Sir Keir Starmer in the runup to the general election because the Conservatives would probably portray the move as signing up to free movement by the back door. The proposal would open the country to an influx of cheap European labour, even when limited to the under-30s. While youth mobility was discussed during the original Brexit negotiations, no agreement was reached and the government has since prioritised striking bilateral deals with individual EU member states. Government sources expressed scepticism about the proposal, saying that it would be more beneficial to EU citizens than Britons and would jeopardise net migration targets. It would require Britain to drop the health visa surcharge and allow EU citizens access to government-funded apprenticeships. Brussels is proposing that British citizens will be able to access a single European country rather than travelling and working freely around the bloc. The commission insisted that its proposal was not a return to freedom of movement but would widen the opportunities available to young people. "The envisaged agreement would provide for limited-in-time mobility, subject to the fulfilment of conditions to be checked before the mobility can take place," it said. "It is not about conferring to young UK nationals the benefits of the fundamental freedom of movement enjoyed by EU citizens." Maros Sefcovic, the commission's executive vice-president said that it would help to restore some of the rights lost by younger citizens. "Our aim is to rebuild human bridges between young Europeans on both sides of the Channel," he said. The plan still has to be agreed by EU leaders and would be subject to a negotiation with Britain. Sources in the EU said that the proposal was aimed at stopping Britain from negotiating preferential and bilateral agreements with countries such as France or Germany over poorer member states. "This proposal is aimed at preserving the interests of the union as a priority and that is reflected in its balance in ensuring European young people are the main beneficiaries," an official said. In Britain, industry leaders and pro- EU campaigners have been pushing for an EU-wide visa scheme for young people. Naomi Smith, chief executive of the anti-Brexit campaign group Best for Britain, said that young Britons had been "robbed of the irreplaceable formative experiences their parents and older siblings enjoyed, because of a failed Brexit project they did not vote for". Load-Date: April 19, 2024  End of Document
