   'VILE' FILM CLAIMS BORIS LIED ABOUT NEARLY DYING FROM COVID; Gary Lineker duped into taking part in diehard Remainer's documentary that cruelly smears the former PM Despicable smear ar against the ex-PM Mail on Sunday (London) July 23, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,8,9 Length: 1472 words Byline: Mark Hookham; Chris Pollard; Glen Owen Body   AN arch-Remainer, who once tried to prosecute Boris Johnson over Brexit, has claimed in a documentary that the former Prime Minister lied about nearly dying from Covid. The grossly offensive allegation has been made by Marcus Ball, a failed entrepreneur, in a documentary which claims Mr Johnson's account of his illness at the beginning of the pandemic was a 'terrible lie' designed to manipulate the public. A trailer for the film, which has yet to be released, features a number of celebrities including Gary Lineker, the BBC's highest paid presenter, who says in it that 'the public deserve the truth'. The ex footballer - who was temporarily taken off air earlier this year after comparing Government immigration policy to Nazi Germany - last night distanced himself from the film upon being alerted about its content. After being contacted by The Mail on Sunday, Mr Lineker refused to endorse the film and demanded his interview be removed. But his original involvement in the documentary has sparked fury among allies of Mr Johnson and threatens to drag the BBC into another damaging controversy. Reversed_NoLines 'This vile conspiracy theory is disgusting and an example of how totally deranged treatment of Boris has become,' a source close to Mr Johnson said. 'It is an insult to the wonderful NHS staff who helped save his life. 'It is beyond belief that anyone who considers themselves a civil or credible participant in public life could have had anything to do with this film or conspiracy theory.' Challenged by The Mail on Sunday this weekend, Mr Lineker, 62, said he was unaware of the film's smear against Mr Johnson. Within minutes of this newspaper emailing his spokesman, the trailer was removed from YouTube. Mr Johnson was taken to hospital in April 2020, just after the first lockdown had been imposed. He spent three days in intensive NoSunday_NoLines Small_Reversed_NoCrest_NoLines PAGE 24 care and required 'litres and litres of oxygen' to keep him alive. The MoS had revealed how the 59-yearold's condition was so serious that doctors considered puncturing a hole in his neck to help him breathe - a procedure called a tracheostomy. After he was discharged, Mr Johnson said 'The NHS saved my life, no question' and told how doctors 'had a strategy to deal with a "death of Stalin"-type scenario'. Dr Nick Price, who was responsible for Mr Johnson's care at St Thomas' Hospital in Lambeth, South London, described how he was forced to contemplate the possibility of the then PM dying. 'You think about what could have gone wrong,' he said. 'I didn't want it [the worst] to happen. It was on my watch. My name was on his bed. He was my patient.' Critical care nurse Jenny McGee told a broadcaster in her native New Zealand in 2020 that Mr Johnson 'absolutely needed' to be treated in intensive care. Mr Johnson's then fiancee, and now wife, Carrie was convinced she was going to lose the father of her then-unborn baby. 'She was certain he was going to die for 24 hours and was absolutely terrified,' said one friend. 'To suggest anything else is beyond despicable. It's the lowest of the low.' Mr Ball, who describes himself as a 'investigative private prosecutor' and previously launched a doomed High Court bid to prosecute the former PM over Brexit, has been pushing an online conspiracy theory that Mr Johnson 'faked almost dying of Covid'. On April 14, 2020, two days after Mr Johnson was discharged from hospital, Mr Ball questioned whether the then PM had even been taken to St Thomas'. The 33-yearold wrote on Twitter: 'The PR timing is just too perfect. 'I fear that he may be dodging responsibility by becoming a victim.' He later conceded that his suspicion was 'wrong'. Mr Ball, who calls his investigation 'deathgate', has also absurdly claimed the fact that St Thomas' had not published a plan to announce the PM's death showed Mr Johnson had 'lied to the public'. He claims to have been preparing a documentary, called The Power Of Lies, for more than three years. In May last year, Mr Ball boasted on Twitter that he had interviewed Mr Lineker, praising the 'football icon' for speaking 'so eloquently about the lying in politics problem'. Last month, he posted his trailer online featuring a short clip from his interview with the star, who is paid £1.3million a year by the BBC. Lasting one minute and 47 seconds, the trailer's spurious allegation is outlined by Anthony Eskander, a lawyer who worked with Mr Ball on his failed Brexit prosecution of Mr Johnson. 'In 2020, we were all told that theUK Prime Minister Boris Johnson had nearly died of Covid-19 in St Thomas' Hospital in London,' he states. 'And not only that, but that his doctors had prepared to announce his death. 'But because of Marcus's investigation, which has employed legal methods that have never been used before, it's now been revealed that the story wasn't true.' He later adds: 'It was a terrible lie. And in my view designed to manipulate the general public.' Hugh Brown, a former Labour Party council candidate described in the film as a Freedom of Information 'expert', states: 'That he would lie about something like that? it's incomprehensible'. Dr Andrew Gellert, a retired GP, adds: 'In my medical career, I've never heard of anything remotely like this.' Interviewed in a studio in front of a blue screen, Mr Lineker declares: 'Whatever side of politics you're on, it doesn't really matter whether it's... you know, you just want the truth. And the public deserve the truth.' The trailer concludes with Mr Ball saying it is 'really stupid' that lying in politics is not illegal. But quizzed by the MoS on Friday, Mr Lineker's spokesman said the presenter was 'never' informed that the documentary would accuse Mr Johnson of lying about his illness. 'The interview was a general piece about the importance about truth in politics,' the spokesman said. 'The specific allegation was not put to him. 'We are taking steps for this passage to be removed from the trailer, and any similar material in the documentary itself.' Within minutes of The Mail on Sunday receiving this email, the trailer was no longer available on YouTube, but it could still be viewed on Twitter. Senior Tory MPs voiced their outrage at Mr Lineker's involvement with the film. Nigel Mills, MP for Amber Valley, said: 'A respectable, sensible person would not go anywhere near it. 'It's ridiculous that the BBC's highest-paid presenter is getting himself associated with whack-job nonsense like this. It's almost lending the BBC's credibility to an utterly absurd conspiracy theory. 'We all saw Boris when he was ill. We've seen interviews with the people who cared for him in hospital. 'He had to take a month off to recover after coming out. What more evidence do you need? 'The BBC would say it needs to exist because we need impartial, respected news people can trust. 'But when their highest-paid presenter starts getting involved in total nonsense conspiracy theories, their defence is destroyed.' Former Home Secretary Priti Patel said: 'This looks like vested interests pursuing fake news.' With a string of wound-up businesses to his name, Mr Ball was a relatively unknown anti-Brexit campaigner until he attempted to prosecute Mr Johnson in 2019 over his claim during the Brexit referendum that the UK sent £350million a week to the EU. Dismissing his claim, two High Court judges ruled that an earlier finding that the prosecution was not vexatious was flawed. It later emerged Mr Ball spent more than £50,000 of the donations he raised for the campaign on himself, including £6,000 on renting an apartment near Canary Wharf. He has appealed online for donations to finish his documentary and has raised more than £73,000 via an online crowdfunding page. Supporters who donate £1,000 are promised tickets to the film's premiere and will 'enjoy drinks and canapés with its interviewees'. It is not clear where the documentary will be screened but it features interviews with former BBC war correspondent Kate Adie and Labour MPs Chris Bryant and Dawn Butler. There is no suggestion any of them knew about its allegations about Mr Johnson. Mr Ball said: 'Our documentary film, The Power of Lies: The Story Of Lying in Politics And The Fight To Make it Illegal, is still in production and is not yet complete. It would be premature to comment.' Mr Eskander, Dr Gellert and Mr Brown declined to comment. A spokesman for Guy's and St Thomas' said: 'We remain incredibly proud of the staff who cared for the former Prime Minister with dedication, skill and compassion.' A BBC source said: 'It's impossible to understand the nature or context of the contribution in question based on the short clip that has appeared online.' l Additional reporting: Natasha Livingstone and Molly Clayton 'Carrie was certain he was going to die for 24 hours' 'A sensible person would not go anywhere near it' Graphic    SICK BED: An illustration of Mr Johnson in hospital on Mr Ball's Twitter page Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
