   'When you are adopted you feel a need to prove that your parents did not make a mistake'; The ADOPTED SON Michael Gove is one of the most divisive figures in Westminster. He stabbed Boris Johnson in the back, alienated teachers by denouncing the 'Blob' and claimed, 'People have had enough of experts.' The Brexiteer, who was adopted at four months, says his childhood shaped him as a politician - and reveals why he has never contacted his birth mother The Times (London) June 24, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: MAGAZINE;FEATURES; Pg. 24,25,26,27,29 Length: 3693 words Byline: Rachel Sylvester;Alice Thomson Body   M ichael Gove still remembers vividly the moment his mother told him he was adopted. "She explained that, unlike other children, I hadn't been born to them. She had a phrase, which I always carry with me - 'You didn't grow under my heart; you grew in it,' " he tells us. The levelling-up secretary is convinced that his background has had a profound impact on his character and his politics, although it didn't feel like that when he was young. "When you're a child, you're aware that there is a difference, but the everyday circumstances of my life were very similar to the other boys and girls in the school I was attending. It's difficult for any parent to explain to a child, when they're different, where that difference comes from. But in my mum's case, she wanted to emphasise that this was not something that should be seen as traumatic, and I don't remember feeling uncomfortable about it. It was a fact. Other children were adopted as well. It's obviously had an impact but, at the time, it didn't seem disorientating." Now, as he looks back on his life and career, he can see the effect of his adoption on almost everything he has done. "When you are adopted, there is this sense of gratitude that someone has chosen you, so you feel an obligation on some level to prove that they didn't make a mistake, that their gamble on taking you into their life, and the love and care they invested in you, wasn't wasted. You need to demonstrate that you are giving something back or justifying the risks that they took. You're aware of how different things might have been. If I'd been adopted by another family, then the opportunities I have had might never have arisen." There is, he suggests, an urgency created by being abandoned at a very early age. "You can't hang around; you've got to try to make a positive difference. You should 'do' rather than 'be'." FEATURES REX As a cabinet minister at the Department for Education, then the Ministry of Justice and now the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, Gove has long championed what he describes as "the lost boys", who, like the children in Peter Pan, fell out of their prams when the nurse was looking the other way. "It's because I was very much aware that I could have been one. I don't consider myself to be a lost boy, but I remember when I was SPREAD: FIRSTPIX, PA, THIS shadow education spokesman looking at a school in Liverpool where only one child got five good GCSEs in the whole of that year." FIRSTPIX. SPREAD: He thought about how his parents had driven from their home in Aberdeen to collect him from the adoption agency in Edinburgh. "The distance of that school from Edinburgh was the distance of Aberdeen to Edinburgh, so PREVIOUS if my life had literally taken a different course, then that might have been the environment where I ended up. Similarly, if I hadn't had loving parents, what would it have been like growing up in an environment where you have to put up with neglect or abuse or you're seeing not just arguing, but domestic violence? And you know that those things can have a scarring effect, and that you can have people who've got amazing potential, who, because of those circumstances earlier in life, are almost predetermined to go off the rails." So, in his mind, he has always felt lucky. "Intervention can transform people's lives and if we do the right things as a society then the potential of so many more people can be fulfilled. More to the point, the misery that they face, and which can sometimes be visited on others as a result of their falling through the cracks, can be alleviated or prevented." Gove is the great survivor at Westminster. At the age of 55, he has served in the cabinet of every prime minister going back to 2010 - apart from Liz Truss. "I don't know whether it's good fortune or a curse," he says. "You can never know in politics how your career is going to take shape, because so much of it depends on contingency. There's no single reason. I think there have been different relationships with different prime ministers, and different political events have meant that, at different times, I've served a purpose for each." The former Times journalist is also the Conservatives' most restless and energetic reformer, a free thinker who has driven through change in every department he has led with a relentless vigour. As education secretary he had pictures of Lenin and Malcolm X hanging on his wall. David Cameron, who preferred Harold Macmillan, once said that his colleague was almost "Maoist" in his desire for permanent revolution and "creative destruction". Yet there is something enigmatic and contradictory about Gove. His critics say he is uncompromising, unreliable, untrustworthy and disloyal; he is always scrupulously polite without always being scrupulous. His was a classic tale of treachery when he knifed Boris Johnson in the back during the 2016 Tory leadership contest, becoming known as "the snake" in Westminster. He retorted he was "just a regular guy". He is not tribal about his politics and has Labour friends - once when we went to interview him at home in west London, he confided that he had Tony Blair's autobiography on his bedside table. But he is one of the most divisive figures at Westminster, who alienated teachers by denouncing the "Blob" in education and angered Remainers when he surprised even his closest allies by backing Brexit. He is a high-minded idealist who is also a political street fighter, an intellectual who declared during the EU referendum, "The people of this country have had enough of experts." One old friend describes him as a "Jekyll and Hyde" figure who can switch in the blink of an eye between nasty and nice. His manners can be overly impeccable or quietly rude, according to another of his closest friends, who fell out with him after the Brexit referendum: "He often lavishes praise in person, only to stand people up if he receives a better offer of a speech, party or event." Gove himself acknowledges that he has made mistakes and does not deny he is flawed. "There are certain traits that children who have been adopted apparently manifest later," he says. "It comes back to attachment. The physical relationship between a mother and child in the first few weeks and months matters a huge amount and, without that, there is something missing. The impact can be minimal or maximal, but because of that primal early feeling of rejection, there can subsequently be a fear of commitment. If you've had that original early feeling of abandonment, then you worry about throwing all of yourself into something later because of the fear that, if you make a total commitment, you'll face abandonment or rejection again." It's impossible not to think of his decision to withdraw his support from Boris Johnson in 2016, leading him to drop out of the leadership contest. We ask Gove whether he thinks he has a fear of abandonment or rejection in politics. "You can't psychoanalyse yourself," he replies. "I haven't had therapy, apart from hypnotherapy to deal with my fear of flying. I don't know the extent to which all my manifold character defects are down to things that happened very early in my life or other extraneous factors as well. I find it fascinating, but I also find it very difficult to exercise objective judgment about myself, because you need to be a professional psychotherapist to disentangle all the different influences and impacts that may bear on why someone is the way they are." Michael Andrew Gove was born Graeme Andrew Logan on August 26, 1967. He was taken into care, then adopted at four months by Ernest Gove, who had a fishing business, and his wife, Christine. He arrived at his new family just before Christmas with nothing but the clothes he was wearing. "My birth mother came from Edinburgh," he says. "She was studying cookery with a view to becoming a cookery demonstrator." His earliest memories are of growing up in a "warm, comfortable, loving" home, a small ground-floor flat in a terraced street in Aberdeen. "I remember certain things about it that now seem unimaginably distant - the fact that we had a mangle in the back garden for drying clothes. My sister, Angela, who was also adopted, arrived when I was five. I remember her being bathed in a metal bath in front of the fire." Angela had a different birth mother and there was another "complicating factor" - she was profoundly deaf. "So, the biggest challenge for us as a family was adjusting to that," Gove says. "It meant both my mother and I, and my dad, learning sign language as Angela went to primary school." At his wedding to Sarah Vine, the Daily Mail journalist, in 2001 his parents described how they had one unusual child and one "normal" one - it was Michael who had always seemed different because he was so clever. While Gove never felt like "an oddity" when he was young - "I think as I've got older, I've been more and more aware of how weird I am," he says with a smile - he did however feel slightly out of place. "There's always the cuckoo in the nest phenomenon, the sense that you don't have the same genetic make-up as the people who are adopting you. How will you differ? My dad was a great sportsman. He was a boxer; he had football trials. I am by no means a natural athlete. Anyone who has seen me trying to run will know that." Instead, he became a voracious reader from an early age. "My mum and dad would take me every week to the local department store, which had a bookshop in it, give me my pocket money and I would buy a new book. They encouraged and nurtured that. Everything from music to drama, they were always willing to indulge me and support me." The family was comfortable though not well-off. "My dad's business ran into difficulties later on in my teenage years, but when I was growing up everything was, compared with the other boys and girls in my school, broadly equivalent. I don't remember anything that could be regarded as discomfort or hardship." His first plane journey was to Detroit when he was four, to visit an aunt. "My mum and dad put me in a little kilt for the journey, which I think was probably calculated to delight my auntie, because she had moved from Scotland to America, and also to make sure that we got preferential treatment on the flight. From that moment on, until I was at university, I never wore a kilt." But he still speaks with a distinctive Scottish lilt and says Aberdeen is the place where he feels most at home. In 2021 he was photographed on the dancefloor of a nightclub there amid much ridicule. "I definitely feel more relaxed in Aberdeen than anywhere else, because anywhere you've grown up - where the streets are more familiar, where you could almost be blindfolded and find your way back home - feels more reassuring," he says. "Home for anyone will be a place where you will have had your first pint, gone to a nightclub for the first time - it feels in a way safer there than other places where you have developed your career or met other friends." Gove's father died recently and going back for the funeral made him reconsider his childhood. "My dad had been ill for some time. He had adult-onset diabetes, then heart trouble. In the final year or two of his life, he was increasingly housebound, and in the final couple of months bedbound, so as I visited him over that period, I could see the deterioration. I was conscious that my dad's life was drawing to a close. That inevitably makes you reflect on your own mortality, and also on what you owe to your parents." His voice cracks a little as he says, "I just missed my father dying, because I was on a plane when he passed away. I talked to my father in the run-up to what was inevitable about the impact he'd had on me and how grateful I was to him and to Mum. But, you know, there's always more that you can say." He thinks his dad was proud of him, even if he didn't show it. "For Scotsmen of a certain age, showing emotion is not the thing, and so there was a lack of effusiveness in the way in which my father, or men of his generation, would express themselves. But yes, he was." He remembers shortly after he got elected as an MP, his parents coming down to the House of Commons. "It was the day of the Queen's Speech debate and Tony Blair was opening for the government. I was trying to intervene, not so much because I had an important political point to make, but just so that my mum and dad could see me asking the prime minister a question. I think they were [proud of me], but I'm proud of them because I think that they made real sacrifices in order to help me. They stinted a little on themselves in order to be able to pay school fees to send me to an independent school." There was a selflessness that he still admires. "My parents were not showy people but as I look back on it, and particularly as I look back on my dad's life, towards the end, I realised that, to a significant extent, he'd lived for others. I don't want to suggest they were martyrs - they had fun in life, my mum still does - but they were thinking of others constantly. So that example weighs with me." As a teenager, Gove sometimes worked at his father's business. "I hated it. I am naturally clumsy, so my first attempt to gut fish involved far more of my blood than anything else," he says. But he saw something romantic in aspects of it. "I remember going with my dad in the evening back to his business where they were smoking the fish for kippers. There'd be a brickwork kiln with wood shavings that he would set light to, and then the wood shavings would smoke the fish overnight, as they were hanging on metal poles. So, while it wasn't the case that I ever thought that it would be my future, the fact that this was something that his grandfather built, this was something that he believed in and also this was something that was an all-consuming enterprise - there was something touching about that." Instead of going into the family business, Gove won a place at Oxford to read English. "I didn't think it was escaping, more a sense of an adventure." He fell in with a posh set although he insists, "I was not interested in the Bullingdon Club; it seemed unimaginably distant. There were all these student organisations that seemed essentially devoted entirely to self-indulgence. I wouldn't say that I was a stranger to self-indulgence as a student, but I was more interested in debating, getting to know the world, political discussion." Did he take drugs? "Yes, I did," he replies. He thinks the moment has passed when politicians need to cover their youthful experimentation. "I can't remember who it was who used the phrase about a 'normal undergraduate experience'. I wouldn't want to normalise drug taking, quite the opposite actually, but I think that it was a feature of the student experience for a lot of people." At 16, Gove had been the Labour candidate in a school election, but at Oxford he joined the Conservative Party. He met Johnson in his first year in the Oxford Union bar. "I remember the shock of blond hair and I remember he was wearing a sports jacket, chinos and penny loafers. He explained that he was a Tory, and I said, 'What sort of Tory are you?' And he said, 'I'm a green Conservative.' " These days the former prime minister seems keener to set himself up as figurehead for the Tory right, calling in his letter resigning as an MP for Rishi Sunak to return to a "properly Conservative government". Gove thinks Johnson, whose mother was admitted to a psychiatric unit when he was ten, may have some of the character traits associated with early abandonment that he sees in himself. "Even though he would never say it, Boris feels himself a bit of an outsider," he says. "To the outside world, it would seem as though Eton, Balliol, all the rest of it, would make him the quintessential insider? But it must have had an impact on Boris when his mum, whom he clearly loved, was undergoing treatment for mental ill health at a very early stage in his life." His relationship with Johnson weaves through the Tory psychodrama of recent years. Many on the Tory right have never forgiven him for the betrayal of their man, but social liberals in his party also felt let down by the aggressive campaign he endorsed as one of the figureheads of Vote Leave. Gove admits he often turns over in his mind the tumultuous events of 2016 when, following the Brexit result, he turned on Johnson, declaring he could not "provide the leadership or build the team for the task ahead". He has been vindicated, hasn't he? "I think that the best thing now is for history to make its judgment, both about Brexit and about Boris," he says. "I served alongside Boris almost all the time that he was prime minister, so I'm as complicit as anyone in those years, the things that we got right and the things that didn't go so right. I should bear responsibility, so I don't think I should criticise Boris over that." Last year, that dramatic assassination was repaid when Johnson fired Gove "for disloyalty" before he could quit. The bitter feuds at Westminster over the past six years have had a huge personal impact on Gove. He lost close friends over Brexit and in 2021 his marriage ended. Was it worth it? "I don't think that politicians should ever ask anyone for sympathy on the basis of the decisions that they've taken. We have to own the consequences of that," he says. "When it comes to friendships and relationships, there is never a single cause. Politics has a pulverising impact on families and can place friendships under very great strain. That's why when I see other politicians being attacked, including politicians in other parties, I do feel a sense of sympathy for them, because I think that they're facing an unfair level of pressure." It is, he admits, difficult to see your family drawn into your own drama. "In my children's case, I want to safeguard and protect their privacy, but I think it's also the case that they've emerged as happy, robust and wonderful people. That's far more to do with Sarah than me, but you can never really know the extent to which any of the challenges that those around you face are wholly down to the decisions you've made or down to other factors. It's not for me to judge how other people react to me, but what I would always want to do is to make sure that any criticism directed at me didn't bear on those close to me." The Tory MP Danny Kruger said recently that marriage between men and women was the only basis for a safe and successful society. "I wouldn't take that view," Gove says, "because I think that it doesn't reflect the reality of how so many of us live our lives." Gove has never tried to find his birth mother. "I've always found it difficult because I'm naturally nosy, but I've also felt that trying to trace my birth mother would make it seem to my mum as though there was somehow something missing in our relationship." He has learnt nothing about his birth father. "You can't know the balance between the things you adopt from your parents and the things that are a result of genetics," he says. "Most scientists would say that nature is more important than nurture? But I don't think I would be the person that I am, for good or ill, if it hadn't been for my mum and dad and the love they gave and the example they set. Those parts of me that are different, there's a curiosity about, and of course the curiosity is magnified in looking at my own children now." It is rare to hear a cabinet minister in such a reflective mood, but Gove seems liberated by the thought that there may be life after politics. "A while back, when I was on the back benches during the time that Liz was prime minister, I thought then that would be the end, that I would never be in government again. I was quite looking forward to doing other things, but when Rishi became prime minister and asked me to come back, I was pleased to, because I felt there was unfinished business." He thinks it takes at least two years to make a difference in a department. Gove no longer wants to be leader. "I think the moment's past, if it ever really existed. Having seen how Rishi is handling being prime minister, and also some of the things he has had to put up with, I'm glad it's him, not me," he says. Perhaps at some level he also knows that he is now too "divisive" within and without his party. If Gove were to lose his seat at the next general election, a former cabinet colleague says, he may, like Michael Portillo before him, become a "totem of our increasingly toxic party". He could decide he has played his part on the political stage and "quit to return to journalism or even perhaps try out his moves on Strictly", as the former Labour leadership candidate Ed Balls did. There is an insecurity beneath the smart suits and perfectly formed sentences. Gove has been the MP for the home counties seat of Surrey Heath since 2005 and held many of the top jobs in government. But the adopted son of a fishmonger from Aberdeen still sees himself as an outsider. Even when he was part of the so-called Notting Hill set under Cameron, one friend says he always felt like the "butler" among the wealthier public school boys. Gove thinks, though, that there are always perspectives that he can bring by being "slightly athwart" or at some distance from other groups. "It would be preposterous for me to say that I was some sort of desperate outcast who suddenly finds himself around the cabinet table by accident. But I don't think any of us sitting around the cabinet table ever feel, 'Gosh, this is natural. This is where I should be. I'm entirely at home.' Almost anyone in politics will feel at certain points a variety of imposter syndrome, or will feel, if I get things wrong - and I'm entirely capable of doing so - then I could be out on my ear." n Rachel Sylvester and Alice Thomson talk to Michael Gove for their podcast What I Wish I'd Known, available now. Listen via the Times Radio app or wherever you get your podcasts 'Even though he would never say it, Boris feels himself a bit of an outsider' 'Trying to trace my birth mother would make it seem to my mum as though there was something missing' Graphic    Michael Gove, 55, photographed by Michael Leckie. Opposite, clockwise from top left: aged 11 months, at the beach with his mother, Christine; Gove at 14 months old; the 15-year-old schoolboy; at 8 with his mother, his sister, Angela, his father, Ernest, and their terrier, Tobby Load-Date: June 24, 2023  End of Document
