   @Your View Tweets, emails and letters to: The Editor, i, 9 Derry Street, London W8 5HY i-news June 22, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 20 Length: 653 words Body   Keen an open mind… and door Jessie Hewitson writes about taking in lodgers to beat the mortgage crisis (Opinion, 19 June). I had to bite the bullet in 2013 and rent out my second bedroom following a redundancy and health issues in my late fifties. To my surprise, I carried on for the next eight years until I downsized, but I had the most brilliant people living in the house. Keep an open door and open mind and you won't go far wrong. JONTY BUTLER PORTLAND, DORSET Brexit got us into this mess Thank you, James Hanning, for your perceptive article about Boris Johnson (Another View, 21 June). I cannot understand why people think he's so clever. I studied Latin for A-level and all you need is a memory for vocabulary, grammar rules and a good teacher (given that he went to Eton, he probably had one). As for Brexit, so many people were sick of hearing about it and most probably couldn't be bothered with the true facts, wanting a quick fix. They certainly had that in the three word slogan: "Get Brexit done", doubtless thought up by Johnson's righthand man, Dominic Cummings. So now this country is a mess, thanks to Johnson and Brexit. GILLIAN RANDALL LIGHTWATER, SURREY 'Titanic' trip poses questions What sort of a world are we living in? Rich individuals can afford to pay roughly £200,000 to visit the wreck of the Titanic while people fleeing from Sudan are dying because aid agencies do not have enough funds to give them food and shelter. ROB SINDALL OADBY, LEICESTERSHIRE It does rather stick in the craw to see the sad story of the Titan sub getting so much more coverage than the not dissimilar drowning of more than 500 migrants off the coast of Greece last week. NICK PRITCHARD SOUTHAMPTON Raising rates is not working The Bank of England has raised interest rates several times to try to bring down inflation, but it is clearly not working. In my opinion, price rises are due to higher energy costs, a fall in the pound, and higher food and other costs arising from Brexit. It isn't because of over-consumption. When will the Bank learn that putting up interest rates will not bring down inflation in these circumstances? All it does is increase homelessness and despair as mortgages and rents rise. ALISON WILLOTT COED CEFN, POWYS Prices of fuel, groceries, and other things are going down. The problem is that the Government is comparing present prices with a year ago. This is history, and not relevant. ALAN OCKENDON GULBERWICK, SHETLAND Osborne sounds like a hypocrite Surely, I cannot be the only i reader who is astounded by George Osborne's hypocrisy in claiming that a decade of austerity actually prepared us for the Covid-19 pandemic? I am reminded of the fable of the man who decided to teach his horse to live without eating. Each day he gave his horse less and less, and although it could still pull a cart, it got slower and slower. He did indeed teach the horse to live on less food. But as luck would have it, just as other businessmen came to admire his acumen, the horse died. DAVID HUGHES BATH, SOMERSET Speaking up for wronged wives Thank you to Yasmin Alibhai-Brown (Opinion, 20 June) for speaking out about and "for" the silent, wronged wives of weak, self-indulgent men. It would be enlightening to find out why they remain silent. I am so very glad that Princess Diana didn't remain silent. ELAINE PAYNE VIA EMAIL Our commitment We take very seriously our responsibility to maintain high editorial standards, and are grateful to readers for pointing out any errors. i adheres to the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) code of practice. If you wish to complain about our editorial coverage, especially with relation to inaccuracy or intrusion, please write to The Editor, i, 9 Derry Street, London W8 5HY, or email reader@inews.co.uk You can contact Ipso directly at Gate House, 1 Farringdon Street, London, EC4M 7LG, telephone 0300 123 2220, or by email on inquiries@ipso.co.uk Load-Date: June 21, 2023  End of Document
