   "The price of housing should correct by 20%-25%, but since there is no supply, it doesn't go down." CE Noticias Financieras English December 13, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 4723 words Body    Enrique Losantos (Madrid, 1971) has been the head of JLL in Spain, one of the largest real estate consultancies in the world, for nine years, and since 2020 he has also been the head of Capital Markets for Southern Europe. He is slow to speak, seems to measure every word and, at the same time, speaks his mind bluntly. A great connoisseur of the market, he has almost three decades of experience behind him, with a profile that combines a deep knowledge of the pure real estate business and the financial business that conditions it so much.  A member of one of the most relevant families in the sector, he began his career operating with derivatives at Société Générale, then he was for seven years deputy financial director of Riofisa, from where he jumped to Banesto, as head of the real estate area within the Capital Markets Department, until in 2013 he joined Santander as head of mergers and acquisitions in the real estate sector for Europe. With all that background, he now advises several of the most important investors in the world and tries to anticipate where the market is and where it is going. Questions whose answers, on many occasions, he finds at the source of the recent covid crisis. QUESTION: A year ago, many voices were arguing that the rate hike was going to stop at 2%; we are at 4.5%. The question is no longer how much rates are going to rise, but how much the adjustment is going to be and when it is going to happen. What do you predict?  ANSWER. We have had about three very different semesters. The last half of last year was very volatile and uncertain. Volatility, because the market moved very quickly, and a lot of uncertainty because we did not know what was happening or how far it was going to go. In the first half of this year, rates stopped rising so fast, volatility went down, but uncertainty continued, because we didn't know where it was going to stop either. And we have gone from summer to now, to a period of no volatility, and I would say no uncertainty, because the monetary authorities, here and in the United States, made it clear that there were not going to be many more hikes and that with these levels of interest rates they were going to be able to control inflation. Q. But there is still uncertainty as to what the adjustment in Spain will be.  A. With these levels of interest rates, we have to see how this affects the real estate market, because the correlation with yields is practically perfect. We are seeing how, little by little, the brackets are narrowing between those who are buyers, who have quickly jumped on these new interest rates, on these new yield expectations, and the sellers, who were waiting for this to be neither so fast nor so high and, of course, for it to be temporary. The fact that it is going to be temporary is not going to happen, because the monetary authorities have already said so. What is happening in the market? The ranges are finally starting to narrow, because there is no longer any expectation that interest rates will fall again in the short term. The rules of the market have been set, and now those who want to work with those rules will work, and those who don't will have to wait for who knows how long. Q. You still have not given me a figure for how much the adjustment should be.  A. The adjustment has already taken place, everybody knows where the market is. What happens is that there are no transactions that can show where it is. "The adjustment has already occurred, everyone knows where the market is. What there are no transactions that can show where it is". Q. Everybody knows where the market is, but nobody wants to acknowledge it?  A. No! I can tell you that in the office market we have gone from yields in the prime zone of 3.5%-3.75% to 4.5%. Q. What price adjustment does that imply?  A. Between 30% and 40%. This is one part of the equation, because you know that in the capitalization of perpetual annuities you have a numerator, which is the annuities, and a denominator, which is the yields. If you adjust the denominator by 30% or 40%, but in the numerator, due to the effect of inflation in the last two years, you adjust by 10% or 15%, one is compensated a little bit by the other, and even so prices go down. So you have adjustments of between 20% and 30% simply due to the effect of mathematics, the correlation of yields and the rise in inflation. Q. In the whole market?  A. Well, there are polarizations. In the malls the adjustment had already happened. When covid started, it was thought to be heading for an apocalypse and the market adjusted very quickly. For almost four years the performance [performance] of high street retail has only improved, consumption has only improved, and malls are running at record highs. Both high street and malls and median parks are at record levels. "The market has to adjust 20% to 30% simply because of the correlation of 'yields' and rising inflation." Q. As long as there is no recession or drop in consumption.  A. The variable here is going to be what happens with unemployment: if unemployment rises, all this can be called into question. If unemployment does not increase, this will end up consolidating, with the great advantage that the adjustment in terms of yields has already taken place. Q. And residential?  A. Residential, in parts. In the multifamily world what you find is a very important appetite on the part of the investor world, based on a rational that is the lack of supply. There is a very clear housing problem in Spain that is not being addressed, because there are no facilities for it to be addressed: the capital is watching how the Government presents laws that can favor or harm the development of the promotions. There is also an issue with the subsidized housing modules that has not been resolved. The modules have become very outdated, the profitability does not come out and, therefore, subsidized housing is not being promoted. And then you have the problem with the listed companies, which are deducting 50% of the NAV [net asset value], which does not facilitate the arrival of capital. "Both high street retail and shopping centers and parks are at record levels." Q. Is that capital that is waiting to come in new, are they different investors than the ones known so far?  A. As long as these companies are trading at discounts of 50% on average, it is very difficult for them to capitalize or for new capital to come in, which could have a dilutive effect on existing shareholders. So it is not attractive for any listed company to raise capital now. First, they do not need it, because from the financial point of view they are all with debt under control and without any need for cash, because they generate enough cash flow to continue investing, and to continue paying dividends which, in many cases, in the eyes of current shareholders, are double-digit dividend yields. The current shareholder says: look, when the time comes that the share price is close to NAV, I will be willing to sell. In the meantime, I'm not going to be willing to sell. Any action I take to increase capital or sell at current prices will dilute me and cause me a write-off, an impairment, and I have no need to do that. Q. With regard to the individual, is there also going to be an adjustment in housing, because of the mathematics you were talking about?   A. Mathematically, there should be, because the cost of financing a home today is much higher than a year and a half ago. The same mortgage in euros per month gives you access to between 3%-40% less of the principal, paying the same installment. What is the installment that I could pay a year and a half ago? Let's put 1,000 euros. With that 1,000 euros, what loan did I have access to with the interest rates of a year and a half ago? Let's put 200,000 euros. Today, that amount is 30%-35% less for the same 1,000 euros that you had the capacity to pay. Q. So, mathematically speaking, housing should correct between 30%-35%?  A. No, it should correct the financeable amount, which if you add this to the equity [capital] you have to put in, then yes, it should correct 20%-25%. What is happening? Because there is no supply, this does not happen. Q. There is no supply of new construction, but there is supply of second-hand, which is bought with the same mortgages. So, it should be corrected.  A. But it is not correcting because the market is not capable of adjusting to that supply. The demand is so brutal that this is not happening, at least in the main cities, it is not happening. Q. And the reason may not be that, as mortgages in Spain are reviewed every six months and annually, and the rate hike was not completed until after the summer, it is now that people are seeing that their mortgage rates have doubled?  A. Culturally, in Spain, the last thing to stop paying is the mortgage. So, the driver "I need to sell because I can't pay" will be very exceptional. Default rates are very low. "In Spain, the last thing to stop paying is the mortgage. So, the 'I need to sell because I can't pay' will be very exceptional." Q. What about apartments that are bought as investments?  A. It could happen, but it is not happening. Housing in Spain, if you look for a headline, is not going down, nor is it expected to go down in the short term. Is there a logic to it going down? Yes. Is it happening? No. It is true that it could be happening in second or third homes, but in first homes it is not happening. Housing continues to rise due to a lack of supply, because it is not being produced. Q. In the housing market, are we condemned to have an upper class of owners and a middle, lower-middle and lower class of tenants?  A. I don't think so. There is always talk about Spain being a country of homeowners. It is true that the ratio is changing, but we are still at 75%-25% according to our latest estimate. If you break that 75%-25% down a bit, what you see is that 68%-70% of people under 30 years of age live in rented accommodation. Between the ages of 30 and 40, not more than 40% of people live in rented accommodation. From the age of 40 onwards, everybody has their own home because they have had time to save and everybody buys. The problem there is that the time to get the money and the problem of prices has lengthened. The two are correlated. The price of housing means that this has been delayed over time and that it is costing a little more to reach this situation than it did even four or five years ago. "Housing in Spain is not going down and is not expected to go down in the short term. Is there a logic to it going down? Yes. Is it happening? No" Q. JLL is a reference in the hotel sector. Has the sector definitely overcome the covid or are holes being plugged and in the coming years we will see surprises?  A. The crisis is over. What's more, we are at record levels. It is true that it is still a sector, despite what it seems, very granular, a large majority of the owners are family owners, and what is happening is a process of concentration, of creation of large portfolios by many investors, with the aim of creating large platforms and making this ownership more efficient through management contracts with the large operators. It is happening now, especially in vacation hotels, and it will continue in the coming years. Q. But we won't see demolition operations.  A. No, no, no. Let's see, there are niches in the luxury market where we will continue to see record prices. But that is a very, very small, tiny part of the market. No, it doesn't represent it by a long shot. Q. Who should lead the adjustment and when is it going to happen?  A. This is cultural, because in other European countries this adjustment has taken place massively, they have not had any problem in recognizing the losses or the lost profits that they have to recognize, because the market adjusts. Culturally, in southern Europe, we are always six months to a year behind. Capitulating? There are sectors where it is more clearly seen, such as offices, but again, polarized, because if you come to the center of Madrid or the center of Barcelona, prices have not dropped significantly. Even, the absorption capacity has gone up in the centers, even, rents are going up. It is a paradox! In neighborhoods or in more secondary areas it is happening, because there is a relocation of many corporate headquarters to city centers due to the need to provide buildings that adapt to the new ESG requirements. This is the major macro trend that is now in all large corporations. This has resulted in workspaces being encouraged more in city centers for communication, work-life balance, collaboration.... For many reasons. "In hotels, there is a trend among large investors to create large platforms that will continue in the coming years." Q. What are going to be the megatrends that will determine the future of the market in this new post rate hike stage?  A. The main one, without a doubt, is sustainability. Before the arrival of covid, it was like the fifth megatrend that most influenced the real estate sector; today it is the first. Maybe covid brought us a sense of fragility, people thought: let's make the world a little more sustainable and our lives more sustainable. We are going to live differently. What the real estate sector has said is: we are going to make work spaces, living spaces, leisure spaces, commercial spaces a little more sustainable. We are going to work to make those spaces sufficiently attractive, so that, for example, another of the megatrends, which is the return to the office, will happen. The advantage of working in the office is that a lot more things happen in the office than happen at home. Q. I thought the megatrend was remote work, not back to the office.  A. That was a trend three years ago. Now, the megatrend is the opposite. It's the desire throughout the business world to go back to a workspace where you can collaborate, teach, work more closely with internal and external customers. Human contact has come back to the top of the agenda as a civilization. Being all cooped up at home, for a specific event, worked very well, but it generates pernicious habits and disconnects from reality. You see reality through a screen. This is happening even with the most digital companies, they are the first ones that have started to force all their employees to go back to the office. "Human contact has become a priority again as a civilization. Working at home disconnects from reality." Q. But you understand that there will be no going back to the way things used to be. We are now moving toward hybrid work.  A. Of course. But let's not confuse hybrid work with flexibility. Flexibility is going to exist, hybrid work with certain limits is going to continue to exist, what is not going to exist is the obligation to continue working from home. Time clocking is anachronistic and has nothing to do with reality. In the world of services, no one signs up, no one is measured by the time they spend sitting in front of a screen, they are measured by the results, by the objectives they have set. Q. Another megatrend is everything related to living, senior living, student residences? Is Spain going to be different because of its culture and climate?  A. Undoubtedly, all this influences the fact that we are a preferred destination for all this healthcare subsector. Because of the climate, because we have very good tax benefits for foreigners, because of the infrastructure, because of a healthcare system that is the envy of many countries, and also because of prices. Spain, comparatively speaking, is a cheap country, which makes it very attractive to come to live in Spain. And in the world of senior living there is a phenomenon of attraction of non-dependent retirees, who prefer to live on the Spanish coast rather than in their own countries. Q. In this context of Spain's growing attractiveness, is Barcelona going to be able to continue being the country's second place?  A. Of course, it has the entity, the size, the attractiveness, a base, it is consolidated. Nobody questions that Barcelona will be the second destination for investment in Spain. Q. Not even with the new wave of uncertainty generated by the agreements of the new Government with the pro-independence parties?  A. The fundamentals of the region, of the city, and even of Spain as a country are so solid that I believe they transcend any political action, no matter how intense that political action may be. Political action that in no case is intentionally focused on destroying that investment capacity, but that many times have an influence on the investment market. Q. We already have the example of Brexit. Doesn't the threat of that happening in Catalonia scare off investment?  A. Brexit is a good example. The real estate market in England right now is much more mature and even more expensive than it was before Brexit. Q. But the United Kingdom is a country, not an autonomous community. And it has lost a lot with the Brexit.  A. It has lost a lot with the Brexit, with the disconnection. I am not saying that this is something that is going to encourage and improve the real estate market in Catalonia if there is a problem. What I am saying is that, many times, political problems are absolutely unrelated to the economic dynamics and that no matter how much politicians try to spoil an economic dynamic, it is not spoiled, because the fundamentals are much more solid than their ability to influence them. "No one questions that Barcelona will continue to be the second destination for investment in Spain". Q. But we will never know what was lost.  A. The lost profit, what could have been, never. Q. If I were an institutional investor, where would you recommend investing now?  A. There is no straightforward answer. It depends on the risk and return you are looking for. I would say that there are sectors in which the rationale is very clear and everything related to living, precisely because of the lack of supply, is a sector where you have to continue investing in new housing, student residences, senior living, and even the world of hospitals. With covid, it also became very clear that healthcare has become a priority. Q. Healthcare or health, the whole world linked to wanting to look good?  A. Also, but the development of private healthcare is skyrocketing. Everyone is growing, everyone is expanding and creating new hospitals. That's what I'm talking about. In the hotel world, we have also seen a boom. For several reasons. One is that, also motivated by covid, carpe diem has taken over. People want to enjoy more of their free time, their leisure time, and they are willing to spend more money and consume more money on it as opposed to other savings possibilities. There has been a rise in the Revpar, in the income per room, of between 20% and 30% in the last two or three years. This has brought in a lot of foreign capital. And lastly, I would say retail, precisely, because it was a market that was reviled, because e-commerce was going to eat it all up, and when it has been confirmed that this has not happened, we are starting to see unusual activity. If I had to recommend to a foreign investor where to put his money, I would say living, hotels and retail. "Private healthcare development is skyrocketing. Everyone is growing, everyone is expanding and creating new hospitals." Q. In which areas?  A. In living it is generalized, in the big cities it is happening. For example, Madrid welcomes 40,000 new inhabitants every year who need a place to live. Barcelona has a big problem, which is benefiting the greater Barcelona, the whole suburbs, because nothing has been developed in Barcelona in the last few years. And retail is everywhere. If we go to the high street, major cities; if we go to shopping centers, dominant shopping centers in any region of Spain, as well as retail parks. And then, there is a trend, a sub-niche, which is the world of supermarkets, which is probably the most demanded asset right now within the retail world. Q. Why?  A. It developed again with covid. Much more importance was given to food, and local commerce came in a supervening way. The supermarket chains continue to expand, they have very aggressive expansion plans, all the chains, and a huge amount of capital to invest and accompany that expansion. It is understood that the penetration rate of supermarkets in a large majority of populations is still low compared to what they consider to be optimal. "The world of supermarkets is probably the most sought-after asset in the retail market right now. Q. Has the time come for opportunistic transactions, as many have been expecting for months?  A. Not yet. I would say that 50%-60% of the market is a value-add market, which is below core plus, and then the other 40% is divided a little bit in half between core plus, where there are still operations.... In the core there is nothing, it is dry. When the market finishes accepting where the new prices are, there will start to be operations in the core world. Opportunists have always been there, looking for opportunities, for bargains. Now they are much more alert because they know that there are refinancing problems, many funds need to sell and that institutional capital in the market is scarce. In fact, the main capital in the market now is private capital. Q. You said earlier that there will be no capital increases.  A. In indirect investment through the stock market. That is not where the money is going to come in. No matter how good the operation they want to attack, it would have to be such an absurd profitability that it would compensate the dilution of value that they are going to have. Because, the more they buy and put in that company that trades at 50%, the more they are diluted. It's a paradox, you know what I mean? If you buy something that is worth 100 on the market and the next day it is quoted at 50, you've made a piece of cake. This is the problem with listed companies. That is why companies cannot sell themselves, nor increase their capital, nor make any capital operation between them, because they are diluted, unless they change, which is of no use to them, small pieces of paper between them to NAV values. But that is absurd, it does not generate value for any of them, it does not generate cash, cash flow, it does not give them any return. "Money is not going to come into the stock market: if you buy something that is worth 100 on the market and the next day it is priced at 50, you have made a killing". Q. So investors in listed companies will focus on recovering their investment via dividends?  A. Of course, the only thing they can do is to continue working, generating cash flow, and with that cash flow return a return to shareholders that, in many cases, are double-digit dividends. Moreover, any investor who invests in these companies now, in general, has good dividends, because they are trading at such a discount. In a way, what has happened is that the market has not adjusted in terms of value. The adjustment in terms of value is a consequence of the adjustment in terms of dividend yield [dividend yield]. What real estate has done is to raise this dividend via a price decrease, and the discounts are more of a consequence than a reason. You give me a 3% dividend, I want it to be 6%, so you have to be worth half that. Q. I don't know if they have been so organized or if they have adapted to the circumstances  A. Between 70% and 90% of real estate trading is automatic, the machines do it according to flows: you give so much, they value you so much. They value you for the milk, not for the meat. They take the cow and say: how much milk does it produce? Well, the milk market pays that much per liter. This is what you are worth. They don't take into account that the meat is tastier, or it's Kobe or Wagyu, or it's from a terna from Avila. They don't care. The market adjusts the return capacity and as a consequence has an impact on equity valuations in the real market. "70% of real estate 'trading' is done by machines based on flows: so much you give, so much they value you. They value you for the milk, not the meat." Q. This explains the desperation of many management teams, who always say: no matter what we do, the market does not recognize anything.  A. Of course. Basically what investors are saying is: don't force me to buy you with a 4% to 5% dividend yield, when large-corporate fixed income is giving me 6% or 7%. Why are you better at 5% than this at 6% or 7%? In a way, the market is adjusting automatically, but it is a dividend yield issue, not a value issue. They are not questioning whether by liquidating the company you will reach the NAV, which I am sure you will. What they are questioning is what you are capable of producing with that NAV. They compare you with other asset classes. Q. So it's an ideal time to launch delisting ops.  A. One solution is to delist, delist and go back to market reality. That is to say, if my assets are worth 100, but in the stock market they are worth 50 because I am compared to that profitability, if I were to go to a liquidation process now, I would probably get 95 or 105. Notice that also Merlin sells things, Colonial sells things, and everything they sell they usually sell at par value or above book value. This is one of the asymmetries in the market. Q. What can be done with transactions closed at 3% when rates have gone to 4.5%?  A. It is a problem, especially if they are leveraged, because a yield of 3% discounted later to 4.5% is a loss of 33%, directly, it is pure mathematics. If that operation was financed at 50% when it was at 3%, today the leverage, at that 4.5%, is 75% and, without having done anything, even an asset that continues to function and continues the debt, today is in default due to a value coverage ratio. This is something that financial institutions have to review. It is a problem because it forces owners to quickly look for more leveraged financing, which allows them to continue to sit on the asset, or to sell immediately, realizing a loss or forgoing a loss of profit. Q. In this analysis, where are the funds that entered in the previous crisis and have not yet unwound their positions?  A. They will have to keep working. That is what they are doing. They will have to continue generating value with the assets they have, waiting for a market situation to make them liquid at the returns they expect. There is no other choice. The large portfolios bought by the big investors have been liquidated by more than 50%. Their shareholders have recovered all their equity via refinancing and continue to liquidate what they call the long tail, the long tail, the retail of it all. "The large portfolios bought by the funds, for the most part, have been liquidated by more than 50% and their shareholders have recovered all their equity." Q. They haven't done too badly then either.  A. They haven't done badly. None of them. Everyone who bought at the beginning of the last decade has done marvelously, they have earned a lot of money. What happens is that now they are left with what they call the tail, there is a lot of retail. And there is also money to be made in the retail market, but it is a more complicated market situation. Curiously, at the end of the year, the market is getting livelier. We have had a month and a half, two months with much more activity than we have had in the last six months. Q. Will there be a year-end rally?  A. That price adjustment, that activity that we said would have to arrive at some point, is starting to arrive, it is not what we expect to happen in the first half of the year, or the second half of next year, but it is much more activity than we had last summer, or before the summer, even in September.  Enrique Losantos (Madrid, 1971) has been at the helm of JLL in Spain, one of the world's largest real estate consultancies, for nine years, and since 2020 he has also been the head of Capital Markets for Southern Europe. He is slow to speak, seems to measure every word and, at the same time, says what he thinks bluntly. A great connoisseur of the market, he has almost three decades of experience behind him, with a profile that combines a deep knowledge of the pure real estate business and the financial business that conditions it so much.  Load-Date: December 14, 2023  End of Document
