   A back and forth with pugilistic elan of Ali vs Frazier; SKETCH Scottish Daily Mail June 30, 2023 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 642 words Byline: STEPHEN DAISLEY Body   IT was Thursday, noon, and Nicola Sturgeon was dodging difficult questions again. I almost felt nostalgic. The only thing missing was Humza Yousaf by her side yapping 'that telt him' every three minutes. The former First Minister was appearing before the UK Covid inquiry in London, the second senior Scottish Government figure to do so. Jeane Freeman had addressed the inquiry the day before. Or tried to, thanks to a video link that started and stopped more abruptly than a Russian coup. Emphasised in Sturgeon's tuppence worth was how Brexit had become a distraction from preparing for a possible pandemic. She reminded the inquiry that an EU exit had 'happened completely against the will of the Scottish Government'. One of her bugbears was the impact of ending free movement on NHS staffing levels. Counsel to the inquiry was Hugo Keith, KC, a vaguely charming silk with a plummy voice that oozed Oxbridge. He suggested Sturgeon's experience managing swine flu made her 'familiar with the exquisite difficulties of the onset of a pandemic on a country'. He offered each syllable like a glass of port after dinner. If they make a film about this, he'll be played by Colin Firth, flatter Matt Hancock into a damning admission and get elected prime minister before the credits roll. Asked by Keith whether 'diverting resources, money and time' from pandemic planning to preparing for a no-deal Brexit was 'a false economy', Sturgeon rejoined that 'every aspect of Brexit has been a false economy'. His tone turned scimitar-sharp. 'Miss Sturgeon, that is a witness box, not a soap box,' he chided. 'We cannot allow the political debate about Brexit to be ventilated here.' They're great ones for the ventilating, these lawyers. Either they have some kind of beef with the word 'discuss' or they're on a retainer to an air-con manufacturer for some subliminal marketing. Sturgeon was chastened, but only for a moment, and soon enough she was blaming Brexit for setting a 'tone' for sometimes strained intergovernmental relations. Keith cornered her on the Scottish Government's reported nonattendance at two key pandemic preparedness meetings. She offered to get more information but her old righthand man, John Swinney, also up before the inquiry yesterday, suggested technical issues might have been to blame in one instance. Pressed on why fresh guidance for Scottish medical staff had still to be implemented, Sturgeon reminded the inquiry she had left government three months ago. All well and good, Keith told her, but what about the final two years when she was First Minister? It'so rare to see Sturgeon placed under merciless scrutiny that even a lawyerly back-and-forth over recondite details of public health policy took on the pugilistic elan of Ali vs Frazier. Swinney's round brought nothing so punchy. He is a practised bore when the moment calls for it. Out came Honest John, a character to which he has returned many times over the years. T HE owlish bank manager, the level-headed chap who keeps his cool in even the most frantic of circumstances. Of course, you might think a pandemic would have been a prime opportunity to put these skills to good use. Instead, we got air-gulping babble about 'third sector interfaces'. The perception of one organisation that its offer to help was not taken up elicited the reply: 'I regret the fact that that was the case.' It was as though he was commenting on events that happened to someone else. Sturgeon will return to the inquiry at a later date and face questions about her management of the pandemic. As she was speaking, 400 miles north, her successor was batting back questions about why the Scottish inquiry had yet to get started. Yesterday's session hinted at an explanation. Sturgeon excels at demagoguing about Westminster but when she has to stick to the facts, things don't go so well for her. Graphic    Scrutiny: Ms Sturgeon yesterdayGrilled: Nicola Sturgeon arrives at the London inquiry yesterday Load-Date: June 30, 2023  End of Document
