   Alister Jack should follow the buffoon who first appointed him and quit The National (Scotland) June 15, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 589 words Byline: Readers of The National Body   THE latest episode in the Alister Jack Brexit soap opera (Tuesday-s National front-page headline -Jack reveals -transgressions- by Scotland against the UK-) really beggars belief and one must seriously question the mental capacity of this insecure Secretary of State for Scotland. Is this insecurity and consistent lack of any semblance of positivity linked to the man-s own realisation that the Brexit project he brazenly tried to -shove down the throats- of the anti-Brexit Scottish electorate/Scottish Government has failed miserably!? All his lies and deceptions about the Brexit -land of milk and honey- have been fully exposed. And reflecting back to the period when he -crawled out of the woodwork- after being appointed by another Brexit serial liar/prime minister named Boris Johnson, he has shamelessly attempted to normalise Brexit in a country, Bella Caledonia, that was politically literate when it comes to this kinda political nonsense and rightly never voted for it in 2016. Undeterred, this morose charlatan has continued to tell Scotland and the Scottish people to -get back in your box-. The man is also incapable of having an adult conversation about the Scottish constitution and our sovereign right to self-determination. Indeed, Jack should retrospectively be told in no uncertain terms to -get back in his own box- and leave Scotland well alone - the game is up Mr Jack! No equal partnership in this fractured Union, especially when one peruses Scotland-s trading status compared with Northern Ireland! The man has rarely uttered a kind word about Scotland and should never have been appointed as the Secretary of State for this proud country. Also, I ask the serious question: Who voted for this arrogant political nobody? Whoever voted him in as a sitting MP should be ashamed of themselves! I agree with many correspondents that this miscreant of a man really holds the title of being the worst Secretary of State for Scotland and please note there have been some absolute numpties who previously held this position with Michael Forsyth (appointed by Mrs Thatcher), another horror of a condescending right-wing anti-Scotland Tory placeman - high up on the list of political flops who couldn-t get their heads around Scottish politics and the national interests of the Scottish people. I concur with Mike Russell-s sentiments after Viceroy Jack-s latest petty, juvenile allegations against the Scottish Government - he should be sacked and kicked out of the British Government once and for all! He can join up with his failed compatriot/buffoon who stupidly appointed him in the first place - Boris Johnson. How satisfying that would be from a truly Scottish perspective, but such a justifiable political action will not happen - no chance when it comes to Brexit-Tories and taking the high moral ground. Gutter politics prevail for them and that-s a fact! Bernie Japs via email Let-s remember Jack was, and maybe still is, a supporter of the great liar Johnson, saying when he stepped down as PM that he was an -excellent- prime minister and calling him a good friend. That makes him just as guilty for the carnage the great liar has wreaked. I suggest that if Jack had any integrity he would resign too. Graham Hewitt via email Last time I looked, Scottish Government ministers were not part of the UK Cabinet so not duty-bound to follow their ministerial code. Any Westminster MP is free to represent the views of their constituents unhindered. I think Alister Jack chooses to be wilfully ignorant. Margaret McVicar via email Load-Date: June 15, 2023  End of Document
