   Almost half of voters favour rejoining EU i-news June 3, 2023 SC1 Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 408 words Byline: Arj Singh Body   Voters believe Brexit has had a negative impact on vast swathes of policy, politics and public services from the economy to the NHS and the UK's standing in the world, exclusive polling suggests. The regrets also appear to be growing on almost all issues, fuelling rising support for rejoining the EU, with almost half (49 per cent) of voters now wanting to reverse Brexit - the highest level recorded by BMG Research in its exclusive surveys for i. More than one in 10 Leave voters (11 per cent) want to rejoin the EU, while 14 per cent of Brexit backers say they would vote the opposite way in the 2016 referendum if they could go back in time, compared with just 4 per cent of Remainers. Voters who would now prefer a closer economic relationship with the EU (48 per cent) greatly outnumber those who want to remain on the current terms of the trade deal negotiated by Boris Johnson and built upon by Rishi Sunak with his Windsor Framework agreement on Northern Ireland (33 per cent). Many more voters said Brexit had a negative rather than positive impact on the economy (net score -42 per cent), the NHS and public services (-34 per cent), the political situation in Northern Ireland (-33 per cent), the UK's ability to influence other countries (-28 per cent), the UK's standing in the world (-27 per cent) and the laws and regulations people and businesses had to follow (-21 per cent). Despite global free trade deals being a major "Brexit benefit" touted by the Leave campaign, many more voters believe leaving the bloc has had a negative impact on commerce with non-EU countries (-21 per cent). Voters also recognise the impact of lost trade with EU countries (-45 per cent). Rob Struthers, head of polling at BMG, said: "On issues such as the economy, migration, the NHS and the cost of living, more of those who voted to leave in 2016 say the impact is negative than positive. "Compared to when we last asked this question in November, on most of the areas we asked about, there has been an increase in the share saying the impact will be negative, with the biggest shifts seen in areas such as the economy, NHS and cost of living. "In this month's poll we also see the largest lead for rejoining the EU over staying out that we have recorded." BMG Research interviewed a representative sample of 1,529 adults in Britain online between 30 and 31 May 2023. Data are weighted. BMG are members of the British Polling Council and abide by their rules. Load-Date: June 2, 2023  End of Document
