   Bank dossier linked Farage to Putin and Hitler Youth The Times (London) July 20, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 5 Length: 778 words Byline: James Beal Body   A dossier on Nigel Farage compiled by Coutts contained claims that he was a xenophobe, sang Hitler Youth songs as a schoolboy and told lies over Brexit. The former leader of the Brexit Party was handed the 40-page document after submitting a "subject access" request to the private bank, which had said it was jettisoning him for commercial reasons. The results expose the detailed work that went into getting rid of him as a client because of his "reputational risk". not compatible with 'inclusive' coutts Despite admitting that Farage had not been charged with wrongdoing, sanctioned or had no known Russian connections, the minutes from Coutts' wealth reputational risk committee meeting on November 17 last year recommend breaking with him. The minutes said: "The committee did not think continuing to bank NF [Nigel Farage] was compatible with Coutts, given his publicly stated views that were at odds with our position as an inclusive organisation." farage has 'xenophobic, chauvinistic and racist views' The author claimed Farage's reputabut tional harm to the bank could stem from his "attitude to foreign countries and their people". They cited pages of quotes from articles about Farage and his views on immigration from left-leaning publications. It included a Guardian story in which he was criticised by Jewish groups for calling Grant Shapps a "globalist" and an article claiming he used "Nazi-style propaganda" in a Leave.EU campaign poster. Farage called the allegations an "appalling slur". dubbed a 'useful idiot' for putin The dossier brands Farage a "useful idiot" for President Putin, citing a report by a society affiliated to the Labour Party. Labour Movement for Europe's article claimed that the Russian leader used Farage, "and threw Russian money" to achieve Brexit. Farage called the Russian issue an "obvious choice" for the bank's "smear campaign". more ties with russia The Coutts document noted there had been an "increase in Russian ties/connection allegations" involving Farage because of the Ukraine war. It noted that even following the Russian invasion, he did not criticise Putin attributed the invasion to the EU and Nato for having provoked Putin. accused of 'inciting hate' by criticising black lives matter The dossier mentioned that there had been "adverse press", including reports that claimed Farage had "incited race hate" when he compared the Black Lives Matter movement to the Taliban. a 'disingenuous grifter' In a risk analysis of Farage the dossier says: "He is considered by many to be a disingenuous grifter and is regularly (almost constantly) the subject of adverse media." It added that Coutts "should be mindful of the role the 'illegal immigrant/ invasion' rhetoric" plays in contributing to discrimination "and in some instances violence, against migrants". sharing gervais joke A section of the dossier focused on Farage's Twitter account, citing him for having retweeted a "transphobic" sketch with the comment: "This is brilliant". The clip was Ricky Gervais joking about trans women. claims he was a 'fascist' and sang hitler youth songs The papers repeat previous press reports, stemming from an old school friend, that Farage was "proud" that his initials also stood for National Front. It included the former friend's claims that a teenage Farage sang "Gas 'em all, gas 'em all" about Jewish people. It also included Farage's historic denial of the allegations. 'false brexit claims' The document accused Farage of having peddled "false Brexit claims", including that during the EU referendum campaign the Leave side pledged to spend £350 million a week on the NHS. farage did meet wealth threshold The bank had previously indicated that Farage had fallen below the "financial threshold" required to hold an account. The politician's subject access request revealed that his means were "now sufficient to retain on a commercial basis". wanting donald trump to win a nobel peace prize There are 11 mentions of Donald Trump, the former US president, including reminders that Farage defended Trump's "pussygate" comments as "locker room banter". It also mentions that Farage was a "strong advocate" for Trump to receive the Nobel peace prize for his dealings with North Korea. criticism of the king The dossier also notes Farage's criticism of the King, including his assertion that when Prince of Wales he was "stupid enough" to let a controversial politician into his private residence. left-wing news sources Many left-wing publications and groups were quoted in the dossier, including the advocacy group Hope Not Hate, the political news site Left Foot Forward and the Labour Movement for Europe, a socialist society. Graphic    IAN WEST/PANigel Farage obtained a 40-page dossier on him that had been drawn up by Coutts. It claimed his views were not compatible with those of the bank, which had displayed pro- LGBT slogans at its headquarters in the Strand, central London Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
