   BORIS QUITS IN FURY OVER PARTYGATE; Ex-PM says he has been forced out in 'witch-hunt' He claims his ousting sets a 'dangerous and unsettling precedent' Warns 'political hitjob' is revenge for Brexit Scottish Daily Mail June 10, 2023 Saturday Edition 2, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 1,4 Length: 1207 words Byline: Jason Groves Body   BORIS Johnson sensationally quit Parliament last night, saying he was forced out in a political witch-hunt over Partygate. In an angry late-night statement, the former Prime Minister said he was standing down as an MP 'with immediate effect'. His departure stunned Rishi Sunak and there was dismay in No 10 at the prospect of a fresh round of Tory bloodletting. Mr Johnson's decision to go comes Turn to Page 4 Continued from Page One three and a half years after he won a landslide election victory, and will raise fresh doubts about whether the Conservatives can hang on to power at next year's election. Just 24 hours earlier, Mr Johnson, 58, was handed the findings of the controversial Commons privileges committee inquiry into Partygate, which sealed his fate. The inquiry, led by Labour's former deputy leader Harriet Harman, is understood to have ruled that he lied to Parliament when he said no rules were broken during lockdown gatherings in No 10 - a claim he has always denied. The committee is thought to have advised that he should be suspended for at least ten days, triggering a by-election in his west London constituency. Mr Johnson said last night he was the victim of a 'witch-hunt' by forces seeking 'revenge for Brexit'. He said the 14-month inquiry had not produced a 'shred of evidence' that he lied to Parliament about lockdown gatherings in No 10. And he accused Ms Harman's committee of setting out to destroy him. 'I did not lie, and I believe that in their hearts the committee know it,' he said. 'Their purpose from the beginning has been to find me guilty, regardless of the facts. This is the very definition of a kangaroo court.' Mr Johnson's decision to go came just hours after his close ally Nadine Dorries quit when she was blocked from receiving a peerage in his resignation honours. Their departures mean the PM faces a difficult double by-election. Tory whips were last night on red alert for more resignations among Mr Johnson's supporters. In a 1,000- word resignation statement, Mr Johnson took a swipe at Mr Sunak, who allies accuse of wanting to destroy his predecessor. He said the majority he won in 2019 was 'clearly at risk' under his successor. Mr Johnson urged the PM to adopt a 'pro-growth' agenda, such as tax cuts to boost the economy. 'Our party needs urgently to recapture its sense of momentum and its belief in what this country can do,' he said. 'We must not be afraid to be a properly Conservative government.' Former Cabinet minister Sir John Redwood said: 'Boris urges a new commitment to the 2019 manifesto, Brexit wins, lower taxes and growth. The Government should take this seriously.' Mr Johnson's decision to go all but ends any prospect of him returning as Tory leader before the next election, although he left the door open to a future comeback, saying he was stepping back 'at least for now'. It also ends Tory dreams of a truce with Mr Sunak that could have seen Mr Johnson campaign for the party in the Red Wall, where his popularity remains high. Labour deputy leader Angela Rayner said the British public were 'sick to the back teeth of this never-ending Tory soap opera played out at their expense'. Allies last night warned that Mr Sunak faces the renewed threat of a Tory civil war. One former Cabinet loyalist said there would be 'hell to pay' over Mr Johnson's treatment. Tory MP Michael Fabricant condemned the 'disgraceful treatment of a political leader who has made world history'. And Sir James Duddridge hinted Mr Johnson would one day return, saying: 'History will recognise the great work Boris did on Brexit, Ukraine and Covid. 'He is a titan amongst minnows. This is the conclusion of a chapter, not the end of the book. We will hear more about Boris over the coming days, months and years.' In a message on a Tory WhatsApp group, Andrea Jenkyns declared 'the Blob has won', and appeared to lay the blame at Mr Sunak's door, saying: 'Well done, Rishi, for starting this nonsense'. Tory sources had indicated they would not ask Conservative MPs to block punishment recommended by the privileges committee. With no legal recourse to challenge its findings, Mr Johnson felt he had no choice but to go. The ex-PM said his removal set a 'dangerous and unsettling precedent'. 'It is very sad to be leaving Parliamedia ment - at least for now - but above all I am bewildered and appalled that I can be forced out, anti-democratically, by a committee chaired and managed, by Harriet Harman, with such egregious bias,' he said. Tory whips were mobilising to calm Mr Johnson's supporters and prevent a mutiny. Mr Sunak faces the prospect of fighting two potentially destabilising by-elections. Labour sources have predicted the party will 'win big' in Mr John- son's Uxbridge and South Ruislip seat, where the former PM had a majority of just over 7,000. Richard Mills, chairman of the Uxbridge and South Ruislip Conservative Association, said Mr Johnson had been an 'outstanding' advocate for the community 'contrary to external perception'. Expressions of shock at the nature of Mr Johnson's exit, as well as tributes to his charisma and his achievements, dominated social feeds of pro-Boris MPs, peers and campaigners last night. Peter Cruddas, a Tory donor and the brains behind efforts to restore Mr Johnson to No 10, said: 'Parliament just put two fingers up to the British electorate and said we don't care who you voted for or the manifesto, we are in charge and we will do what we want. Parliament have forced out a democratically elected PM and MP and his manifesto. Democracy is dead.' Former Tory MEP David Campbell Bannerman blamed 'a kangaroo court under Harriet Harman', adding: 'Expect more by-elections.' Mr Fabricant, awarded a knighthood on Mr Johnson's honours list yesterday, criticised the 'disgraceful treatment of a political leader who has made world history by achieving Brexit and leading the Conservatives to a landslide general election victory'. Former home secretary Priti Patel said: 'Boris Johnson has served our country and his constituency with distinction. He led world in supporting Ukraine, got Brexit done, and was our most electorally successful Prime Minister since Margaret Thatcher. Boris is a political titan whose legacy will stand the test of time.' Emotions were running high when Christian Wakeford, the MP for Bury South who crossed the floor to join Labour in 2022, wrote Mr Johnson would not 'be missed much'. Tory MP Mark Jenkinson hit back: 'You literally owe your seat to him, you traitorous twerp.' Mr Johnson's resignation came on the day his honours list was finally released. He rewarded key allies, handing Jacob Rees-Mogg a knighthood and making Ms Patel a dame. In common with other former prime ministers, Mr Johnson used the 45-strong list to reward key political allies. As well, former Tory aides Ross Kempsell, 31, and Charlotte Owen, 29, will become some of the youngest-ever life peers. Fellow loyal MPs Conor Burns, Simon Clarke and Mr Fabricant, and former Tory chairman Ben Elliot, all received knighthoods. The privileges committee said its panel will meet on Monday to complete its inquiry and publish its report 'promptly'. Comment - Page 18 'Legacy will stand the test of time' 'Well done, Rishi, for starting this nonsense' Graphic    Bombshell: Boris Johnson's exit stunned Downing Street last night Load-Date: June 10, 2023  End of Document
