   BORIS RESIGNS Boris Johnson announces he’s standing down as MP in scathing statement insisting ‘I did NOT lie’ thesun.co.uk June 9, 2023 Friday 9:13 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS,POLITICS; Version:10 Length: 1349 words Byline: Harry Cole Body   BORIS Johnson tonight threw in the towel as an MP with a howl of rage – insisting “I did not lie”. The ex-PM  branded the Partygate probe a “kangaroo court” and a “Brexit witch hunt” that was “determined to use the proceedings  against me to drive me out of parliament”. He also accused his critics of trying to reverse the 2016 referendum  – with his political execution “the necessary first step” and their findings “plainly a political hit-job on someone they oppose.” The shock resignation came just hours after BoJo was handed the MP’s draft findings  that accused him of lying to the Commons about lockdown breaking at No10 with a punishment worthy of a by-election. He said: “It is very sad to be leaving parliament – at least for now – but above all I am bewildered and appalled that I can be forced out, anti-democratically, by a committee chaired and managed, by Harriet Harman , with such egregious bias.” He will now trigger an immediate by-election in his London seat of Uxbridge, departing with a stinging rebuke of his successor Rishi Sunak on the way out. Boris savaged the Tories direction of travel since his No10 defenestration last summer, saying: “We must not be afraid to be a properly Conservative  government.” He warned: “We need to deliver on the 2019 manifesto, which was endorsed by 14million people. We should remember that more than 17million voted for Brexit. ” “When I left office last year the government was only a handful of points behind in the polls. That gap has now massively widened.  And he warned Sunak was driving the Tories off an electoral cliff, saying: “Just a few years after winning the biggest majority in almost half a century, that majority is now clearly at risk.  “Our party needs urgently to recapture its sense of momentum and its belief in what this country can do.  “We need to show how we are making the most of Brexit and we need in the next months to be setting out a pro-growth and pro-investment agenda.  “We need to cut business and personal taxes – and not just as pre-election gimmicks – rather than endlessly putting them up.” But in a hint of a comeback one-day, he said he was departing front-line politics “at least for now.” Mr Johnson also launched a passionate defence of his actions, insisting the Committee did not have a “shred of evidence” that he had knowingly misled the Commons – seen as a political hanging offence. And he turned his fire on the Labour-led probe, questioning the motives of Harriet Harman and Sue Gray  – the Partygate inquisitor now set to become Sir Keir Starmer’s  right hand woman. He hit out: “I did not lie, and I believe that in their hearts the Committee know it.  “But they have wilfully chosen to ignore the truth because from the outset their purpose has not been to discover the truth, or genuinely to understand what was in my mind when I spoke in the Commons.  “Their purpose from the beginning has been to find me guilty, regardless of the facts.  “This is the very definition of a kangaroo court.  “Most members of the Committee – especially the chair – had already expressed deeply prejudicial remarks about my guilt before they had even seen the evidence.  “They should have recused themselves.  “In retrospect it was naive and trusting of me to think that these proceedings could be remotely useful or fair.  “But I was determined to believe in the system, and in justice, and to vindicate what I knew to be the truth.  He added: “It was the same faith in the impartiality of our systems that led me to commission Sue Gray. It is clear that my faith has been misplaced.  “Of course, it suits the Labour Party , the Liberal Democrats , and the SNP to do whatever they can to remove me from parliament.  “Sadly, as we saw in July last year, there are currently some Tory MPs who share that view. “I am not alone in thinking that there is a witch hunt underway, to take revenge for Brexit and ultimately to reverse the 2016 referendum result.  “My removal is the necessary first step, and I believe there has been a concerted attempt to bring it about.  “I am afraid I no longer believe that it is any coincidence that Sue Gray – who investigated gatherings in Number 10 – is now the chief of staff designate of the Labour leader. “ Ultra Boris-ally Nadine Dorries  also quit the Commons after a major dust up over Mr Johnson’s resignation honours list.  The ex-Cabinet Minister was booted off his nominations for the House of Lords in an eleventh hour snub that she blames on Boris’s successor. A furious Dorries has set up a painful by-election showdown in Mid-Bedfordshire after a string of sitting MPs were knocked off Johnson’s long-awaited list of gongs at the last minute. Secret talks between Johnson and Sunak over making Dorries a peer alongside his allies Nigel Adams , Alister Jack and ex-COP President Alok Sharma  had seen Johnson tell his pals they could not defer any peerages until the general election and must stand down if they wished to accept it. Scotland Secretary Mr Jack and Mr Adams both signalled they would not be willing to do this – but Dorries and Sharma said they were ready to go to the Lords immediately. However just hours before the controversial list of gongs was published, they were informed that no sitting MPs would be included and thus avoiding two painful by-election tests. In response Dorries quit anyway with no guarantee she will ever get her peerage now. Johnson’s fiery departure risked reopening years of bitter Tory civil war – with BoJo supporters hinting last night of further resignations and by-elections to try topple Sunak. Last night ex-Home Secretary Dame Priti Patel  was understood to be one of the MPs threatening to go. She came out in support of Johnson on Twitter, writing: “Boris Johnson has served our country and his constituency with distinction. “He led world in supporting Ukraine, got Brexit done, and was our most electorally successful prime minister since Margaret Thatcher. “Boris is a political titan whose legacy will stand the test of time.” Sir Michael Fabricant , who received a knighthood in Boris Johnson’s honours list, said the former prime minister had been the subject of “disgraceful treatment” after he resigned as an MP. He tweeted: “Disgraceful treatment of a political leader who has made world history.” Ex-Minister Brendan Clark Smith said the actions of the Privileges Committee “would put a banana republic to shame.” He added: “It is the people of this country who elect and decide on their MPs. “It’s called democracy and we used to value it here. Sadly this no longer appears to be the case.” Red Wall poster boy Mark Jenkinson added that it was “very sad as we lose a political giant from the Commons, a man that will go down in the history books as one of the greatest political leaders in my lifetime.  “Against all odds – an 80 seat Conservative majority, turned Workington Man out to vote for me and delivered Brexit.” Last night Carrie Johnson  took to social media to share a comment about her husband. It read: “No one else in British politics has the same affinity with the public.” And in a statement Richard Mills, chairman of Uxbridge & South Ruislip Conservative Association, said it had been an “honour and privilege” to work with Boris Johnson since he was elected as the constituency’s MP in 2015. Mr Mills added: “Contrary to external perception his commitment to the constituency over the last eight years has been outstanding and he has delivered for the communities across Uxbridge and South Ruislip. “From supporting local businesses and charities and ensuring a tunnel and further migration against HS2, to protecting Uxbridge police station and putting additional police officers on the street; he has delivered on his promises to local residents. “We respect his decision to stand down as our local MP in response to the outcomes proposed by the Parliamentary Privileges Committee in a coordinated campaign against him. “Boris has been the driving force behind a new Hillingdon Hospital and now that planning and funding has been approved for this, it will be a fitting legacy for him in Uxbridge & South Ruislip.” Load-Date: July 20, 2023  End of Document
