   By shutting my account, banks show they are trying to clamp down on democracy; Commentary The Sunday Telegraph (London) August 6, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 1010 words Byline: Jeremy Hosking Body   Students of my history with Brexit - a small but exclusive class, I grant - might be surprised that Gina Miller and I nally have something in common. Now that her True and Fair political party has had its account shut by Monzo, she joins me in a moment of mutual understanding. I have been through the experience. My attempts to open and maintain a bank account for the various political parties and causes I have espoused have run into the same diculties, diculties that are, of course, an extension of those faced by Nigel Farage. Prompted by his dawn raid on the secret habits of bank bosses, I too have lodged a Subject Access Request with Metro Bank after it shut down an account held by Laurence Fox's Reclaim Party, which I fund. Boo hoo! You may cry. Rich man has toy taken. Well, up to a point, Lord Copper. You see, whether one likes it or not, politics takes money. The big two rely on donors or unions and party membership. And so dominant are they in British politics that everyone else struggles not just for scraps but against the system. And who could honestly look at the state of the nation and say that what is, in eect, a two-party system, doesn't need some sort of alternative oering. Doing that is endishly dicult. Partly because of the rst-past-the-post electoral convention and partly because nancially backing alternatives is almost impossible. Political parties are the lifeblood of democracy - but in today's Britain the establishment institutions will do everything in their power to stop new parties being formed if they don't approve of their aims. The worst o ender is the Electoral Commission, closely followed by the Charity Commission and Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs - and now you can add the big banks to the list. I have discovered this not once but twice in the past decade, rst with Brexit Express BE (BEBE) and now with the Reclaim Party. I have been the sole funder of both parties. Reclaim pursues the vital agenda of arresting the subversion of Britain's history, traditions and culture by our universities, woke activists and privileged media outlets such as the BBC - they who enjoy cosy chats with the now ex-boss of NatWest. I founded Brexit Express in 2016 to campaign in the referendum against British membership of the EU and registered BEBE with the Electoral Commission in 2019 as a political party to ght for the implementation of the referendum result. But because of the success of the Brexit Party, it lay dormant. It became clear during the establishment's 2016-2019 referendum-reversal campaign that the Brexit agenda had become subsumed into the broader culture war that divides and demeans Britain. Not only could Brexiteers be slandered as "racists", but the institutions of the state were commandeered to serve the Remain purpose. The Electoral Commission, the Charity Commission and HMRC (with its inheritance tax grab on donations) were all mobilised to attack people like me who held the wrong views, as dened by the present orthodoxy, and they did so attack us. So in 2020, with Brexit achieved, the members decided to rename BEBE as the Reclaim Party and re-register it with the Electoral Commission as a political party to ght the culture war. The Electoral Commission put every obstacle in our way, giving lengthy and unjustied credence to a complaint by a small Manchester-based charity called the Reclaim Project that the two organisations might be confused. the Reclaim Party was nally registered in February 2021 and seemed free to pursue its political activities - up to a point. For we encountered another major obstacle - the refusal by any major bank to accept our business. Over two years BEBE was turned down by bank after bank, and now Reclaim has encountered the same problem. Banks may be misapplying the Politically Exposed Person (PEP) designation, but if they are doing so in respect of Reclaim they are mistaken in two respects. First, the PEP denition is that anyone so designated should already hold public oce, which does not apply to the Reclaim Party. Second, the nancial institution is only required to perform additional due diligence. A common feature of the rejections BEBE/Reclaim has received is a refusal to provide any explanation, thereby further complicating any remedial concessions we might be able to make. The Reclaim Party, therefore. cannot recruit supporters and ask them for donations or fees, while every other party is free to do so. Cui bono? The Electoral Commission blithely opines that it is not necessary to have a bank account. This ignores the reality that a political party cannot function without direct access to the banking system. We nally managed to open an account for Reclaim (thank you Metro Bank), but only on the highly impractical condition that I remain the sole provider of funds. Members of the public were barred from spending their own money in support of a political party whose beliefs they might share. An extraordinary situation in a democracy and one made even more extraordinary after Metro decided to shut down the account for reasons unstated but, as Mr Farage has demonstrated, easy to guess at. Metro also demanded I place £1million personally on current account, thereby adding "shakedown" to the charge of political discrimination. The Political Parties and Referendums Act 2000 must be amended so as to remove all barriers, including those in the banking system, essential to political participation. You don't have to share my political views to be concerned that the founding and funding of a new political party is being made so dicult by the institutions that are supposed to support and develop a democratic society. And if you don't believe me, you can now ask Gina who nally nds herself, like me, Laurence and all aspirant political challenger brands, beyond the pale. Jeremy Hosking is a businessman and donor for the Reclaim Party 'The public were barred from spending their own money on a party whose beliefs they might share' 'The Electoral Commission blithely opines that it is not necessary to have a bank account' Load-Date: October 27, 2023  End of Document
