   City-based environmentalists are strangling life out of fishing communities Aberdeen Press and Journal June 13, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 26 Length: 1930 words Byline: Struan Nimmo Body   Sir, - After attending a meeting in the town hall in Lerwick on Wednesday June 7, I was left appalled and astonished after seeing the "Highly Protected Marine Areas" being proposed to the Scottish Government regarding our Scottish fishing waters. It appears to me that a group of inner-city environmentalists are intent on banning important aspects of our coastal communities' co-existence with the seas around our shores. They appear to be intent on strangling the life out of the small Scottish communities that have depended on the bounty of the sea to provide sustenance to those coastal communities and their livelihoods for centuries. Our communities living on the periphery of our nation do not have the fast-food outlets available that city dwellers have at their convenience, but what we do have is the natural habitat of the sea that has sustained the lives of humans, birds and beasts all around our nation's shores for thousands of years. These environmentalists appear to think they know how we on the periphery of our nation should live and conduct ourselves regarding the open natural habitat we have lived in all of our lives. Hence, they have been stealthily imposing marine protected areas over vast areas of our islands and country's fishing grounds and are now moving on to the next step of imposing stricter controls on those areas around our shores. These actions for me raised a few questions: who are these people truly working for? Who might be controlling their actions? We just do not know. However, it appears that they are not working for the benefit of the fisherfolk of our own home nation. From the time of Edward Heath's capitulation to the rule of the EEC - now named the EU - over 60% of our nation's fishing fleet have been wiped out, to be replaced by fishing fleets from EU nations, as their fleets could not be sustained in their own countries' coastal waters. We are told that 60% of the seabird population has also been wiped out, which comes as no surprise. I can recall seeing flocks of seabirds following the local fishing boats for miles, feeding on the offal thrown overboard as the crews processed the fish for storage and landing fresh on the local fish markets. Now 60% of those boats are gone and those fish they once caught are caught and frozen whole by overseas fishing fleets who thus provide no easy pickings of food for the local bird life as those frozen fish are landed into container lorries and shipped directly to Europe. Now it appears that some people are intent on wiping out what is left of a once-thriving UK fishing industry, which once fished in our own country's coastal waters. There appears to have been an accumulation of restrictions on the activities and viability of our home fishing fleet over many tens of years, that do not appear to apply, are ignored by, or are not enforced on overseas fishing fleets working in our UK waters. Is it possible that the activities of the Green Party, presently in collusion with the SNP in government of our country, are perhaps being controlled for the benefit of nations from overseas, I wonder? William Polson, Whalsay, Shetland. Royalty fans just as guilty as the media Sir, - It's finally over, Prince Harry has had his two days in court, he has given evidence against the "vile" newspapers who he alleges brought misery to his formative years, using methods more in keeping with the surveillance of enemy agents than a member of our royal family. But if the papers are guilty then so are those so enthralled by the activities of the family that papers have to resort to underhand methods of news collection to feed the hunger of readers who devour the tittle-tattle of possible romances and other salacious activities. Some of these people will be in crowds lining the street when he and Meghan appear, strangers thrusting out their hands in the hope of a handshake or friendly word. If they dared go to events such as Braemar Highland games the same people who feast on media gossip would come and stare at the happy couple as though they were in some way extraordinary. I can say with some satisfaction that I am doing my best to honour his wish for privacy, having not the slightest interest in his activities or the everyday life of those from the House of Windsor. Leave the man in peace so that he and his wife can have the anonymity they desire and so richly deserve. Ivan W Reid, Laurencekirk. Columnist's wise words on Schofield Sir, - I must congratulate Catherine Deveney on her very well written article in The P&J (June 9). I agree wholeheartedly with her and am pleased to see someone in the media with common sense. Phillip Schofield has done nothing illegal and should only have to apologise to his wife and family. I couldn't believe how former presenters and most media were hounding an already haunted-looking man. Caroline Flack's mum said it all when she stated nothing had been learned from the sad death of her daughter. Helen Duncan, Fraserburgh. Planners willing to consider all sides Sir, - As chair of Moray Council's planning and regulatory services committee, I must respond to criticism published on Tuesday June 6 ("Council obliged to engage with us"). The letter claimed residents who objected to a planning application by the Edrington Group for 10 whisky maturation warehouses at Glenrothes Distillery wasted their time making representations to Moray Council. This is untrue. Every representation received by Moray Council is summarised, considered, and responded to, either through explanation of policy or standards, or by reference to conditions placed on the planning permission. Councillors and council officers, however, should not be expected to seek discussion with members of the public who object to applications. Instead, the planning process allows objectors to make representations which form part of the consideration. The planning committee considers the information and its 15 members openly debate the issues. A difference in opinion sparks a vote. Planning legislation allows for material considerations to be taken into account when determining an application which constitutes a departure from the local development plan. In this case, minor departures from policies EP6 Settlement Boundaries and EP7 Forestry and Woodland did not constitute grounds for refusal. However, in acknowledging representations received, controls were made to construction times and vehicles cannot queue on Burnside Street. All relevant policies and views submitted to the council by the public were considered and the committee approved the application. I do not have to agree with the decision but I must stand by it and protect the integrity of the process. David Gordon, chair of Moray Council planning and regulatory services committee. Westminster blots out Green vision Sir, - Lorna Slater and the Greens would make a greater contribution to Scotland and the planet if they were allowed to, without being held back by Westminster. What is it the UK Government don't understand about climate emergency? "Emergency" means we must act fast. Rather than hold the Scottish Government back, they should have been up to speed with us or at least supporting. Full marks to the Greens for trying to get the deposit return scheme up and running, as most other countries already do, while Westminster as usual make a good scheme for the planet into a petty and vindictive political point-scoring exercise. "Back in your place Scotland, we are in charge here" being their message. I wonder how many whales and dolphins etc will die of eating plastic in the time it takes the UK Government to get their act in order. It costs the Scottish Government £600 million a year to mitigate cruel Westminster policies on the poorest in society while a conservative estimate of money held in tax havens is £850 billion, a colossal sum. Yet Westminster would rather pick a fight with the Scottish Government than right the wrongs of their own government. Keep up the good work, Scotland - we will rid ourselves of this toxic Union. The sooner the better. Herbert Petrie, Dyce, Aberdeen. Brexit realities versus idiocy' Sir, - George Emslie (Letters, June 8) delivers another self-indulgent effusion of nonsense. His description of the SNP and EU leaders of being guilty of "Venezuela-style" preaching is ludicrous given that Venezuela has suffered economic collapse, hyperinflation and a humanitarian crisis. Neither Scotland nor the EU conforms to this dystopian description. Until Brexit, Britain was a participating and influential EU member with the ability to make sovereign decisions: how else can you explain Brexit? I cannot recall an instance of Britain being "dictated to by the European Commission". On what basis does he envisage an independent Scotland, on attaining EU membership, being treated in this way? Perhaps he can enlighten me. For his edification, the EU Parliament comprises 705 elected members: a vivid contrast to the House of Lords with 776 unelected members. Furthermore, the EU's accounts are audited annually by the European Court of Auditors, an independent auditor representing the interests of EU taxpayers. Did the EU attempt to hijack the London Stock Exchange? If Mr Emslie is referring to the attempted merger with Deutsche Borse, this was blocked by European regulators. The greatest threat to an already shrinking London stock market, identified by entrepreneur Hermann Hauser, co-founder of ARM, is "Brexit idiocy". Pleasingly, an anti-Brexit momentum is growing. According to YouGov, two-thirds of Britons are "less proud" of the UK than five years ago. They feel the country is in decline, with 61% in favour of reversing Brexit. Will "patriotic" Mr Emslie be the last Brexiteer standing? Ian D McCormick, Aboyne. Minority influence in ship horns row Sir, - The recent controversy concerning the sounding of cruise ship horns (Press and Journal, June 2 and 5) raises a very important point regarding how our society is now being influenced. Using a nautical metaphor, the Bible speaks of the "power of the tongue" and compares it with the means of directing a large vessel. "Although ships are so large, they are steered by a very small rudder" (James 3:6). In this most recent instance, it would seem that a single dissenting voice has been used to dictate policy regarding what is a long-standing naval tradition when a ship leaves port. It is encouraging to read that hundreds have signed a petition to retain this "cheerio" sounding on a vessel's departure. But the much bigger point is the totally disproportionate influence that minorities are having on the everyday lives of the majority. The woke phenomenon is a product of the cultural Marxism which has been sweeping the Western world. While minority and dissenting views should be given respect and consideration, the assumed and alternating "victim/bully boy" postures of recent times should not be permitted to dictate policy. Let's pray that the petition to restore the naval status quo will be effective and, on this and much larger and very serious issues, democracy will prevail. Colin Wilson, North Kessock. Political intrigue keeps us gripped Sir, - Energy Secretary Grant Shapps may soon rival The Donald in terms of hairstyle but he insists that people want to move on from the "drama" of The BoJo. Personally, I like a good drama and suspect few people are enamoured with the current pantomime that is the Sunak government and the tragi-comedy that has beset the Conservative Party. I also like to read detective stories and am relishing the latest episode involving the Scottish National Party. Bill Maxwell, Keith. Load-Date: June 13, 2023  End of Document
