   Conservative manifesto author admits Government has failed i-news August 24, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 1492 words Byline: Richard Vaughan Body   The Conservatives have failed to deliver the overarching aims of their 2019 manifesto, in part because of the "chaos" wrought by Boris Johnson and Liz Truss, one of the authors behind the policy paper has said. Swathes of the Tories' election promises from 2019 remain undelivered and with the next election expected in 12 months, Rishi Sunak's chances of meeting his party's objectives have been written off. Rachel Wolf (inset), a co-author of the 2019 manifesto, said there were several factors that explained the Conservatives' failure to deliver their policy platform, such as the pandemic and the invasion of Ukraine. But she warned that the public would not accept the Government's failure to deliver the basics of the manifesto, which she blamed on the dysfunction caused by two ousted prime ministers. "The question is whether the public would consider the Government to have competently delivered the spirit of the 2019 manifesto: better public services in better local areas, and decent economic management. "Right now, they wouldn't - in part because of the decisions of the previous two prime ministers and the simultaneous chaos and inactivity that resulted." The Prime Minister now has around a year to deliver what his party promised at the last general election. Here i looks at the Government's performance to date. BREXIT The manifesto was entitled Get Brexit Done: Unleash Britain's Potential and while the Conservatives have made good on the first part of the pledge, even the party's biggest cheerleaders harbour doubts over the second aspect. The UK now has sovereignty over its laws, money, trade policy and borders but Brexiteers remain furious over the Government's failure to utilise the UK's newfound post-Brexit freedoms and scrap existing EU laws. Mr Sunak has successfully agreed fresh post-Brexit trading arrangements to replace Mr Johnson's malfunctioning Northern Ireland Protocol, but support is far from unanimous. The PM has yet to ensure Northern Ireland has "unfettered access" to the rest of the UK that will allow it to enjoy the "full economic benefits of Brexit". Verdict: hit Largely delivered but with some serious loose ends remaining. PUBLIC FINANCES The manifesto pledged not to borrow to fund day-to-day spending, while it also promised to have debt lower at the end of the parliament than at the start. Both pledges have had to be abandoned as a result of the pandemic, while the energy crisis brought about by the war in Ukraine has increased borrowing even more. While Mr Sunak has pledged to have debt falling there is no chance he will meet the manifesto pledge. Verdict: miss The pandemic and the war in Ukraine left the pledges in tatters. HEALTH The Government swiftly ticked off many of its manifesto goals when it came to the NHS, including increasing funding for the service by £34bn extra every year. A new NHS plan was introduced in 2020 as promised but the impact of the pandemic has undone much of the Government's plans. The manifesto pledged to increase staff morale, deliver an extra 6,000 doctors in general practice and improve A&E performance, while improving cancer survival rates - each of which appear doomed. Meanwhile, plans to build 40 new hospitals by 2030 are also in doubt, with the National Audit Office stating that just 11 projects would be complete new builds. Verdict: miss While initially delivered on some of its pledges, the pandemic exposed the frailties of the health service. SOCIAL CARE The manifesto vowed to introduce social care reforms that would "stand the test of time". While reforms to the social care system were formulated, they ultimately broke a key promise that "nobody needing care should be forced to sell their home to pay for it". Since coming to power, Mr Sunak has further delayed the introduction of the social care reforms until 2025. Verdict: miss The Government put forward reforms but they have been delayed so far into the distance there are now doubts they will be enacted. IMMIGRATION The Tories have delivered on introducing an Australian-style points-based immigration system. But if voters believed that would lead to lower immigration they were mistaken. The Tories' manifesto promised "overall numbers will come down", while also ensuring that the "British people are always in control". Instead net migration stands at more than 600,000 for this year, while record numbers of asylum seekers are crossing the Channel each year. Mr Sunak has made "stopping the boats" a key pledge, but just this week was unable to say whether the Channel migrant crossings would be stopped by the election. Verdict: miss Despite regaining control over immigration from the EU, net migration from outside Europe has ballooned. EDUCATION The Government is on track to provide £14bn more funding for primary and secondary schools, but this has had to be topped up with an additional £2bn in revenue in 2023-24 and 2024-25 as a result of inflation eating into budgets. Verdict: hit The schools sector has largely been left alone by this government. CRIME AND JUSTICE While the Government is on track to recoup the 20,000 police officers lost since 2010, several policies remain at risk of being missed ahead of the next election. Chronic court backlogs mean the promise that anyone charged with knife possession must appear before magistrates in days not weeks is likely to be missed. Similarly, the pledge to create 10,000 more prison places remains in doubt. A pledge to introduce a new Victims Law has faced a series of delays, with the Victims' and Prisoners Bill only getting its second reading in March. It is touch and go as to whether it will be passed in time by the next election. Verdict: the jury's out The criminal justice system remains in disarray. NET ZERO AND THE ENVIRONMENT Under Boris Johnson, the Tories made decent headway on several environmental pledges. A new Environment Act has been passed, an Office for Environmental Protection has been established and £640m has been pumped into a Nature for Climate fund. But Mr Sunak has signalled a retreat on the net-zero agenda, triggering an informal review into the policies. A pledge to plant 75,000 acres of trees every year was abandoned well before Mr Sunak took over, but he has delayed plans to reform plastic packaging recycling and scrapped plans for a deposit return scheme. A host of animal welfare promises, including a ban on fur, have been dropped. Verdict: the jury's out Much work was carried out under Boris Johnson, but Mr Sunak has shown less appetite for the green agenda. TAX The Government's main pledge to not raise the rate of tax on incomes, VAT and national insurance was missed. NI contributions were raised for many as part of efforts to clear the NHS backlog, and then later to pay for social care reforms. And while income tax rates have not risen, the salary thresholds have remained frozen, meaning millions more people have been dragged into paying higher tax on their incomes. Verdict: miss The tax burden is at its highest since the 80s. TRANSPORT While some aspects of the manifesto have been delivered - such as plans for a Minimum Service Level Act, which came into law earlier this year, and the extension of tap-and-go ticketing - many of the bigger policy plans look highly unlikely to be achieved. The full Liverpool to Hull Northern Powerhouse Rail was scrapped. The Government accepted the decision to press on with HS2 - but Mr Sunak has since delayed it by several years. Major rail reforms have yet to be enacted. Road-building plans remain largely on track. Verdict: the jury's out Plans to overhaul the creaking rail system remain in stasis. HOUSING Ministers have effectively admitted they will miss their overarching housing target of building 300,000 homes a year by the mid-2020s. However, the manifesto pledge of providing one million new homes over the course of this parliament is likely to be met. Rent reforms are under way, such as the ban on no-fault evictions, while leasehold reforms have been delayed but a new leasehold bill is expected in the autumn. The promise to end rough sleeping by the end of the parliament looks doomed, while much vaunted planning reforms have been largely neutered. Verdict: the jury's out The Tories' housing pledges lacked ambition but rental reforms have been welcomed. There is much still to do with time running out. LEVELLING UP It may have been a flagship policy under Mr Johnson's tenure, but the manifesto struggled to define it. The document pledged to invest £100bn in infrastructure, and promised a new towns fund, which was delivered. Pots of levelling-up money to regenerate areas have since been criticised, while the longpromised transport investment has not delivered on what many had hoped for. Verdict: miss Levelling up was the major yardstick by which this Government would be measured. It seems doubtful that those who voted Tory for the first time in 2019 will feel better off by the election in 2024. Load-Date: August 24, 2023  End of Document
