   Courteous and commercially viable - but woke bank still 'exited' Farage; Dossier shows Coutts's extraordinary efforts to cut ties with politician whose views did not align with its values The Daily Telegraph (London) July 20, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 4156 words Body   NIGEL FARAGE has obtained a 40-page document from Coutts bank that details the reasons his accounts were closed in March this year. The file includes 36 pages of background information presented to the bank's wealth reputational risk committee in November 2022, minutes of the meeting and an email exchange confirming the decision to "exit" him as a customer. Despite briefings to the BBC and the Financial Times that Mr Farage's account was closed for financial reasons, the dossier clearly states his views "do not align with our values". The 17,801-word document also says Mr Farage is a commercially viable customer. Minutes of the meeting do not specify which of Mr Farage's views are relevant, but the background briefing paper prepared for the committee covers everything from his friendship with Donald Trump to his views on LGBT issues. The document - abridged here - was given to Mr Farage after he made a subject access request to Coutts, and has been shared with The Daily Telegraph. Coutts wealth reputational risk committee minutes, Nov 17 2022 (extracts) Seeking approval to continue the relationship with Nigel Farage (NF) subject to annual reviews. Referred to NF's controversial profile in public life and politics, reflected in the adverse press outlined in the paper. Despite the adverse press, from a legal perspective NF had not been formally charged of any wrongdoing, and is not subject to any regulatory censure. In terms of any potential connections to Russia, NF had not been sanctioned and had no known direct/indirect Russian connections. Recommendation is to retain NF for now. However, it was noted that NF currently has a mortgage with Coutts, which is due to expire in July 2023 and which, on a commercial basis, we would not look to renew and would suggest winding down the connection on that basis. There were reputational risks to consider of banking NF given he was such a high profile figure and had been the subject of significant adverse press. We needed to be in a position to convene and react quickly if NF made public comments that created an increased reputational risk of Coutts continuing to bank him. Six months before the expiry of NF's mortgage with Coutts, they would indicate to NF that we are not renewing the mortgage, but were such a ''lash point' to arise before then in relation to NF which we are uncomfortable with, [third-party personal data removed] would escalate to this committee. Exiting NF next year on commercial grounds when the mortgage rolls offThe Committee did not think continuing to bank NF was compatible with Coutts given his publicly-stated views that were at odds with our position as an inclusive organisation. This was not a political decision but one centred around inclusivity and purpose. With the support of the Committee, [the Chair] concluded as follows: After the expiry of the mortgage with Coutts, NF would not be a criteria client, and we should set a glide path to exiting NF when that mortgage expires. However, whilst the mortgage is in place we should continue to monitor NF, and if there is a ''lash point' involving NF which would increase the reputational risk to the bank, it should be escalated to this committee promptly. Therefore, the decision was to EXIT Nigel Farage (including business accounts), that exit to be on a glide path to coincide with the expiry of the mortgage, but an earlier exit to be considered if an event occurs that amplifies the reputational risks associated with banking NF. [third-party personal data removed] team would undertake monthly adverse press checks on NF. Background information presented to the committee (extracts) Personal data extracted from papers presented to Wealth Reputational Risk Committee 17 November 2022 Continue relationship ? Throughout 2022 we have seen negative/adverse press reports on NF, but alleged Russian ties/connections allegations increased post the invasion of Ukraine. NF was reviewed by RRF in 2018 with the paper focusing solely on NF's alleged "Russian ties". At that time, the allegations were unproven, and agreement was given to retain the connection and monitor relevant press activity. EC [Economic Contribution] for connection is about £. 1. Client has recently been declassified from Higher Risk PEP to Lower Risk PEP - he will be declassed completely at next review if he remains out of politics for the next 12 months. 2. Following the declassification, the client's EC is now sufficient to retain on commercial basis. www.3.No other group connections in evidence. Key Risks 1. Reputational Risk ? NF is "high profile" and actively courts controversy, this leads to more profile and maintains his presence in the spotlight. He has operated like this throughout his political and media careers. 2. Financial crime risk ? Principally this arises because of the alleged "Russian connection" 3. Reputational risk if we exit ? It is very likely that the client would "go public" if we exited him. 1. Team uncovered adverse press. This included various reports that claimed NF incited race hate when he compared the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement to the Taliban and Islamic extremists in relation to the toppling of the Colston statue in Bristol. This was presented to PB Triage in January 2022, and it was agreed that the client should be referred to RRC. 2. The client was again referred to PB Triage in April 2022 due to adverse press in relation to allegations from Labour MP [third-party personal data removed] that he received £548,573 from Russia Today in 2018. It was again decided at PB Triage that this case should be referred to RRC noting the re-emergence of the allegation of "Russian ties". There is a lot of adverse press relating to NF. This list is not exhaustive, for example it does not capture most of NF's Twitter feed - which is extensive. Racism/Xenophobia/BLM/ Antisemitism 1. 20 October 2022 - The Guardian - Jewish groups criticise Nigel Farage for calling Grant Shapps 'globalist' 2. 22 September 2022 - Eastern Eye commented on a recent Tweet by Nigel Farage in an article titled Lawmakers who 'promoted multiculturalism and diversity' are responsible for Leicester violence 3. 11 June 2020 Business Insider - Nigel Farage leaves LBC radio show 'with immediate effect' after comparing Black Lives Matter protesters to the Taliban 4. Earlier articles from 9 June 2020 on the Mail Online and in the Metro highlighted the following key comments from NF in relation to BLM and the toppling of the Colston statue. Russia/Pro Putin/RT links 1. 25 February 2022 - the Indy - All of the times that Nigel Farage has praised Putin have resurfaced 2. 24 Feb 2022 - London Economic article quoting Farage's Twitter account (not condemning Putin/blaming EU/ Nato for the invasion of Ukraine) 3. Allegations from Labour MP [thirdparty personal data removed] that Nigel Farage received £548,573 from Russia Today (RT) in 2018 alone. Climate denying/Anti Net Zero 1. 13 March 2022 The Guardian - NF campaigning for a referendum on the government's Net Zero policy to decarbonise the economy by 2050 Other adverse press relating to NF ? NF advocating for the Government to leave the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) ? Endorsements of Donald Trump (DT) including defending Trump's "grab them by the pussy" remarks as "locker room banter" and stating that Trump was "not running to be Pope" ? Appearances on InfoWars (the American conspiracy show run by far-Right pundit Alex Jones) and continued support for Alex Jones despite the record award of $1 billion in damages to the families of the Sandy Hook victims for lying about the 2012 mass shooting. Russia/Pro Putin/RT links Risk Mitigation 1. We cannot find evidence of a direct "Russian regime "connection aside from the payments received in relation to media work for the Russian TV channel RT (which is ultimately Russian state owned). We note however that NF has not appeared on RT since 2017. While NF appears to have no direct links, the following points warrant consideration: ? He has regularly been seen to be pro Russia/pro Putin. Even following the Russian invasion, he did not criticise Putin but instead blamed the invasion on the EU and Nato. ? He questioned the sanctioning of Russian individuals. ? He appeared regularly on RT (up until around 2016/2017 although was offered his own show on RT in 2018). ' Farage has been labelled a "useful idiot" for Russian influence in the UK. 2. It doesn't appear that the claim made [third-party personal data removed] about the income NF received from RT was correct. He apparently only received "two small appearance fees" from RT and this was in 2016/2017. Climate denying/Anti Net Zero Risk Mitigation ? He is professional in his dealing with us - we have no reported issues. He has not received any legal or other censure that we can establish. Although he does not align with our views, is likely to be the same for a number of customers. Other Risk Mitigation The mitigants are limited: ? There is no evidence of regulator or legal censure of the client. ? He has not made any reference to the bank in any of his press comments - even though he has made it public that he banks with us. ? NF has referenced support for DT's comments. Given the public nature of the relationship he has with us, there is a risk that if we use this commentary [or the other commentary] to take action it may well be positioned [by NF] to appear to be taking political sides on this debate as the comments are not related to the Bank. Reputational Risk Given NF's high profile and the substantial amount of adverse press connected to him, there are significant reputational risks to the bank in being associated with him. While it is accepted that no criminal convictions have resulted, commentary and behaviours that do not align to the bank's purpose and values have been demonstrated. There are various press articles highlighting NF as being a client of Coutts (for example an article on the Times website dated 9 June 2019 titled 'Everyman' Nigel Farage banks with Coutts). It is also noted that given NF's public profile and penchant for courting controversy, it is highly likely that there will be further adverse press. Accordingly, we are proposing NF be subject to annual reviews. Financial crime risk Principally this arises because of the alleged "Russian connection", and we have identified no direct or specific issues arising from the data collected so we have discounted this risk. Our recommendation is not to exit but if we did decide to do this then we would need to accept that there is a significant reputational riskto the bank in doing so. It is likely that NF would perceive a decision to exit him as 'unfair' and he would almost certainly use his public platform to communicate this dissatisfaction. It is acknowledged that many of the behaviours demonstrated by NF do not align with our values and that there are reputational risks to the bank in being associated with him. Recommendation and rationale: While NF's views do not align to our values, his engagement with us is in line with what we expect - professional, polite and respectful. Accordingly, we are recommending that the approval be given to continue the relationship. Subject to an annual review. Alignment to purpose There are several factors and behaviours demonstrated by NF which arguably do not align with values that serve the common good and that treat people with dignity and respect. When viewed from our perspective however, we are considering him as an individual and to some extent that does include expecting not all views with be the same as ours. However, when considering our stance specifically on ESG/ diversity and inclusion: ESG - supporting diversity and inclusion; Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) equality, LGBTQ rights and social mobility. Comments /articles are not in line with our views or our purpose. Climate Change/B CORPs/Carbon Net Zero The comments uncovered are not in line with banks views on the above. However, it is fair to say this is a finely balanced case and which has looked to assess how he treats the staff, the business and spending significant amount of time examining the more recent press coverage. Whilst there is significant adverse press relating to NF in the public domain, particularly in relation to their association with 'Russia', there has been no evidence of direct links. However he does have strongly and in many cases controversial, publicly held views on many aspects of policy particularly climate & race, and although no legal or other censure has occurred it is clear they do not align with our purpose. These views do however present a reputational risk to the bank in being associated with NF. Cannot see any strong rationale to exit ? There is no evidence that he has direct "connections" with the Russian political infrastructure. He has not been sanctioned in this regard ? The original remarks on his LBC radio show have not been taken further by the authorities/regulators. Although he did leave the show soon after, he has not been prevented from further media work and is now employed at GB news. Part of his "media appeal" is of course the direct/ controversial approach and this at times will come with remarks that many people would find unsupportable / unacceptable. However, he has not made any inappropriate remarks to our staf f and treats them professionally and with courtesy. Although he is now declassed from higher risk PEP status and so with his current risk status, he meets the EC criteria for commercial www.retention.No Financial crime risk We have selected 'No Financial Crime' here. Is customer or beneficial owner/ significant controller a Politically Exposed Person (PEP), public official, politically exposed person relative/close associate, special interest client group? Yes. Currently a Lower Risk PEP however AML team will be looking to declassify him as a PEP on the next review as he is no longer associated with any political party and the parties he has been associated with do not hold any representation. Transactional analysis outcome where applicable We have reviewed the account activity for both NF and Thorn in the side limited and can see nothing that appears to be a payment in relation to Russia, work in Russia or anything pro Putin. The values NF actively and publicly promotes/champions, do not align with the bank's. Particularly given the manner in which he states (and monetises) those views - deliberately using extreme, hatful[sp?] and emotive language (often with a dose of misinformation) - at best he is seen as xenophobic and pandering to racists, and at worst, he is seen as xenophobic and racist. He is considered by many to be a disingenuous grifter and is regularly (almost constantly) the subject of adverse media. Conversely, it's acknowledged that NF's commentary remains within the law regarding hate speech and arguably on the right side of 'glorifying or promoting harmful behaviour'. Being associated with NF presents a material and ongoing reputational risk to the bank. NF's very public profile and propensity for self-promotion. A decision to exit may result in NF using his platform on GB News/social media to air his griev- ances (unless he was too proud or embarrassed to publicise it). In the interests of treating NF fairly and minimising reputational risk, if decision to exit is agreed, I recommend giving advanced notice that we do not have appetite to renew his mortgage or provide banking facilities after the fixed period expires in July 2023. 1. From an international affairs perspective, NF's reputational harm to the bank could stem from two areas. First, any relationship with Putin's regime, or endorsement of the illegal invasion of Ukraine. The paper suggests that we haven't found evidence of the former (beyond 'useful idiot' admiration) and his comments about the invasion fall short of endorsement. A second area would be his broad attitude to foreign countries and their peoples. Here, it's clear to me that NF has - and projects - xenophobic, chauvinistic and racist views, even though this is done within the law. 2. Unless/until NF makes a statement that glorifies or promotes harmful behaviour, we need to consider his default, ambient reputation - which I agree is captured for many as "disingenuous grifter". I agree we should consider exit to coincide with the end of the mortgage term and on a long glide-path that reduces the risk of counter criticism. Personal data extracted from adverse press associated with Nigel Farage from 2016 made available to Wealth Reputational Risk Committee 17 November 2022 Racism/Xenophobia/BLM 9 June 2020 - Nigel Farage is blasted for 'inciting racism' after comparing Black Lives Matter protesters to the Taliban sparking furious row live on GMB. 9 June 2020 - Nigel Farage's mic cut after he compares Black Lives Matter to Taliban. 11 June 2020 - Nigel Farage leaves LBC radio show 'with immediate effect'. 11 March 2022 - Nigel Farage attacks 'woke Wales' over Black Lives Matter banners in National Museum 22 March 2021 - Nigel Farage accused of 'racism' after blaming Bristol anti-policing bill riots on BLM protesters 6 August 2020 - 'Completely dehumanising': Nigel Farage describes group of children and adults landing in Kent as 'invasion' 22 December 2016 - A spokesman for Britain's Hope Not Hate organisation told the Guardian thousands of people had donated money to fund legal action against Nigel Farage after he called the group extremist 18 August 2018 - Palliative care doctor calls out Nigel Farage over "racism, abuse and hate" In July 2021, Farage criticised the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, accusing them of being a "taxi service" for illegal immigrants. NF [on] Wikipedia Who is Nigel Farage [from Hope Not Hate website]. Farage has used racism, xenophobia, sexism and Islamophobia to stir up division, has toxic connections to extreme and far-Rght figures across the world, and Thatcherite beliefs that he has tried to hide from communities in former industrial towns. Russia/Pro Putin/RT links NF seemingly has no direct links with Russia however, much speculation about Russian interference with Brexit remains. Farage has been labelled a "useful idiot" for Russian influence in the UK 24 Feb 2022 - Watch: Reactions as Nigel Farage defends Russia & blames EU for invasion of Ukraine 24 Feb 2022 - London Economic Article quoting Farage's Twitter account - not condemning Putin, excusing his behaviour, again by blaming EU/Nato. NF Wikipedia page Farage said on 24 February 2022 that the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine was "A consequence of EU and Nato expansion". His remarks led some commentators [who?] to compare him to Lord Haw- Haw, the pro-Hitler propagandist. 15 March 2022 - EU politician says Nigel Farage defended Putin 'all the time'. 27 March 2019 - Did Russia make Brexit promoter Farage a 'YouTube star'? 27 May 2019 - Nigel Farage Faces Allegations Of Taking Russian Money. 31 March 2014 - Nigel Farage's relationship with Russian media comes under scrutiny. 8 September 2018 - Russian broadcaster offers Nigel Farage his own show. Climate denying/Anti Net Zero 12 March 2022 - What are the motives behind the timing of Farage's new political campaign? 13 March 2022 - Nigel Farage's hard- Right faction won Brexit. Now net zero is in its sights Nigel Farage understates renewable energy generation [Full Fact] 28 June 2022 - Prince Charles 'stupid enough' to let controversial politician into private residence. Leaving the European Convention on Human Rights 22 June 2022 - Nigel Farage blasts Dominic Raab's Bill of Rights as 'un-British' - 'why not just leave' the ECHR? His Twitter feed also features numerous anti Human Rights Act tweets advocating for leaving the ECHR. Gender Issues At a Q&A on the European Union in January 2014 Mr Farage said there was no discrimination against women causing the gender pay gap. False Brexit Claims When he said he actually couldn't guarantee £350m to the NHS after Brexit. When he said the EU campaign was won 'without a bullet being fired'. Links to Trump Farage has defended Trump's Islamophobic outbursts. When Trump retweeted a post from Britain First, the far-Right anti-Muslim street movement that has carried out "mosque invasions", Farage called the outrage "out of all proportion" and "ridiculous". Since 2018 Farage has been a strong advocate for Trump to receive the Nobel Peace Prize. In June 2020, Farage was exempted by the US officials from the country's travel ban under a "national interest". On 20 June, he posted a picture from the US and was later spotted at the Trump rally. Farage appeared in the audiences of rallies. In an Arizona rally on 29 October, Trump called Farage "one of the most powerful men in Europe" and invited him to speak on the stage, where he described Trump as the "most resilient and brave person" he had ever met. LGBT rights When asked on LBC in 2014, after samesex marriage was legalised in England and Wales, whether he supported gay marriage, he answered that he does "not support the idea of same-sex marriages". He added that he would not campaign to abolish same-sex marriage. He also believes that people who oppose samesex marriage, such as Christian and Muslim communities, should be allowed to speak out about their beliefs. In 2019 Farage defended Ann Widdecombe, a Brexit Party candidate, for remarks that were perceived to be supportive of gay conversion therapy. Conspiracy theories In 2014, Farage appeared in an online documentary, Bilderberg: The Movie, alongside a number of conspiracy theorists. In the film he said: "I've tried very hard not to believe in conspiracy theories," but accused the European Union of moving "towards supranationalism". In 2019, Farage described financier George Soros as "the biggest danger to the entire Western world" and alleged Soros seeks "to undermine democracy and to fundamentally change the makeup, demographically, of the whole European continent". As Soros is of Jewish descent, the Jewish Community Security Trust said "Nigel Farage should ensure that his language does not help [antisemitic conspiracy theories] to spread in British politics". Fascism 14 May 2019 - Farage's fascist past? Nigel Farage was proud at the height of Britain's far-Right movement that his initials NF also stood for National Front, according to a school friend. [The friend] also claims the teenage Mr Farage sang "gas 'em all, gas 'em all", a neo-Nazi song about Jewish people. NF on Twitter 30/06/2022 - Says deportations of criminals to Nigeria won't work "all the while we have the Human Rights Act". 26/06/2022 - "Prince Charles is even more stupid than I thought." [in relation to the accepting suitcases of cash from Sheikh 10 years ago] 23/06/2022 - GB News and Farage praised by 17 year old for giving him a platform to tell 'his' story about being excluded from school for sharing a (racist) meme comparing Shamima Begum to the KKK. Farage states it as him being expelled from school for 'expressing conservative views' 16/06/2022 - Supporting anti-vaxx stance in relation to Djokovic - "It doesn't matter how many times you get vaccinated, you can still catch Coronavirus. This is no longer about health - it's about state control." 15/06/2022 - "Left wing lawyers now dictate our immigration policy. Time to leave the ECHR." 09/06/2022 - Retweeted Peter Bone MP which says "it is time to send the economic migrants to Rwanda and stop the people smuggling gangs" 07/06/2022 - tweet mocking a T-shirt sold on Amazon with the phrase "there are more than two genders" 24/05/2022 - retweets Laurence Fox who has tweeted Ricky Gervais transphobic comedy sketch with the caption "this is brilliant". Email confirming decision to 'exit' Mr Farage as a customer Personal data from internal email exchange regarding Nigel Farage. 10 March 2023 14:46 - I wanted to make you aware of a commercial exit decision we have made on the account of Nigel Farage. The relationship has been below commercial criteria for some time and upon review of Nigel's past public profile and connections, the perceived risks for the future weighed against the benefit of retention the decision was taken to exit upon repayment of an existing mortgage. In making the decision risk factors including accusations of links to Russia, controversial public statements which were felt to conflict with the bank's purpose and the possibility, speculated upon in the press and not denied, of re entry to politics were taken into account. The exit was expected to be in Q3 2023 however the mortgage has now been repaid early and the security released which is triggering an earlier notification of exit to the client. 'He has regularly been seen to be pro Russia/pro Putin. Even following the Russian invasion, he blamed the invasion on the EU and Nato' 'It is likely that NF would perceive a decision to exit him as 'unfair' and he would almost certainly use his public platform' Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
