   Covid inquiry told of 'poor' relations between nations The Times (London) June 30, 2023 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 503 words Byline: Helen Puttick Body   Relations between the four nations of the UK were "pretty poor" during the Covid-19 crisis, John Swinney, the former deputy first minister, has said, as it was claimed that SNP ministers failed to attend crucial pandemic planning meetings. Giving evidence to the UK Covid inquiry, Swinney said that relationships between Westminster and Holyrood had been harmed at the time by the prospect of a no-deal Brexit. Questioned by the inquiry's legal team after Nicola Sturgeon, the former first minister, had given evidence, Swinney said the "relationships between the administrations were pretty poor by that point". He added: "Poor in the aftermath of Brexit because obviously ... in Scotland we were not happy with Brexit at all." The inquiry had previously heard evidence from Jeremy Hunt, the chancellor and former health secretary, that party politics had damaged the relationships between the devolved nations. Asked by Baroness Hallett, the chairwoman of the inquiry, about Hunt's suggestion, Sturgeon said that it would depend on the "different personalities involved". She said: "Inevitably that will be influenced. It shouldn't be but it will be influenced by the wider political context at the time, and perhaps Brexit had an impact in terms of setting the overall tone for some of these intergovernmental relationships." Sturgeon also appeared uncomfortable when challenged by Hugo Keith KC, the inquiry lead counsel, over why the Scottish government was absent from two out of three UK-wide "resilience forum" meetings. Swinney later denied that the Scottish government's absence was due to the poor relations at the time with Westminster. "I think it was perhaps logistics and issues that have gotten in the way," he said. Sturgeon was asked about her government's decision to divert resources from emergency planning in the lead up to the pandemic to prepare for the possibility of a no-deal Brexit. "A significant amount of time, energy and resource was diverted into that from a range of other matters," she said. Asked why resources were pulled from emergency planning when the risk of pandemic had been identified as "the greatest risk facing the nation" in the national risk register, Sturgeon said her government had "no choice". She added: "I deeply regret any consequences that had for our emergency planning in other areas." Questioned whether this was a "false economy", she answered: "I think every aspect of Brexit has been a false economy." She was then warned by Keith that she was in a "witness box, not a soap box". It is expected that Sturgeon will be called on later in the inquiry to give further evidence on her government's response to the pandemic. Separately, Humza Yousaf has confirmed his government would comply with demands to supply all email and WhatsApp messages requested by the Covid-19 inquiries. At first minister's questions, he said: "Any material that is asked for, WhatsApp messages, emails, signals, Telegrams, whatever is asked for or requested, will absolutely be handed over." Graphic    A lawyer warned Sturgeon she was not on "a soap box" Load-Date: June 30, 2023  End of Document
