   Democracy is closer Evening Chronicle June 16, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 332 words Body   FAKE news alert! "Farage admits Brexit's a failure" (Mike Baldwin, Letters , June 14). Of course he doesn't! His use of the word failure referred precisely to what Boris has done with Brexit. On Brexit itself he is clear ... by bringing democracy closer to the people it has been of immeasurable benefit to our country. While I disagree with every word of Farage's postbrexit economic model, his arguments about how Brexit has at a stroke enhanced the quality of British democracy are persuasive. And as for all those quotes predicting Brexit-driven economic doom, I'm almost lost for words. Who predicted a front page headline in this newspaper reporting the lowest ever unemployment rate for the North East? Who suggested the BBC would be reporting this week that the UK economy is growing while at the same time the Eurozone is in recession? Not our esteemed economic gurus. But these are old arguments. Can I briefly describe something I have recently discovered about the EU? Something for those on the progressive wing of politics to contemplate. I guess the "Single European Railway Directive" isn't the kind of thing which crops up in everyday conversation, but it demonstrates how the EU forces change on member states. Basically, the directive prohibits countries from operating a nationalised rail service. It was formulated by the unelected European Commission. When it came into force, 13 countries were declared to be in breach of the rules, so the Commission took legal action against them. Some (like Germany) complied, some fought the commission, France (as usual) took no notice. So why did they do it? Follow the money ... their paymasters, those wealthy capitalists who direct EU economic policy from behind the scenes, could see a sure-fire way to make money. As night follows day, lots of rail privatisations happened and the investors made a killing. We in the UK suffered along with all the rest and are only now beginning to pick up the pieces. JOHN HODGKINS, Seaton Sluice Load-Date: June 16, 2023  End of Document
