   Don't blame the Bank for acting to bring down inflation, that's its job The Times (London) July 4, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 35 Length: 664 words Byline: Karen Ward Body   Most households are feeling the damage of higher inflation and life is getting more difficult for those facing higher rents or rolling off fixed-rate deals on to new, much higher mortgage rates. Many are asking who's to blame. The list of potential culprits is long. Many suggest the pandemic and Russia. Some point the finger at Brexit and companies engaged in "greedflation". Others look no further than the institution in charge of inflation, the Bank of England. The first guilty charge is undeniable. The pandemic and Russia's appalling invasion of Ukraine can account for at least half the inflation we've been experiencing. Problems in the global supply chain meant that companies had to pay higher prices to change routes or buy from those that were able to ship. Meanwhile, Russia's actions sent commodities prices soaring, most notably the gas on which we in Britain are highly dependent. The higher cost of energy has made its way through to the prices of other goods and services and, combined with droughts in parts of Europe, has contributed to soaring food prices. The role of Brexit isn't as clearcut. Headline inflation peaked at 10.6 per cent year-on-year in the eurozone, very similar to ours, and has fallen more quickly only in the past couple of months because lower gas prices are passed through to consumers more quickly. But Brexit may be contributing in other ways. Business investment fell sharply in the UK after the referendum in 2016 and has failed to recover effectively. The level of real business investment is only 1.4 per cent higher than it was at the end of 2015. In France and the United States, it is 33 per cent and 24 per cent higher, respectively. If businesses aren't investing, our capacity to produce goods and services is hindered and this tends to result in higher prices. The impact on the labour market also might be a factor. To the extent that Brexit has resulted in labour shortages in certain areas, this may have raised wages and so the costs faced by certain producers. Yet the jury is out. We simply don't have sufficiently detailed migration data to be able to say conclusively that Brexit is a significant contributor. Instead, the evidence points to a more straightforward explanation for the persistence of high inflation. In my view, we're experiencing a classic case of excess demand - too much money chasing too few goods and services. "Greedflation" is simply firms taking advantage of the fact that demand is so high. The latest inflation print laid this bare. The prices that are now meaningfully accelerating are in services. We can't continue to blame external factors or things we are not in control of. Our economy is simply running too hot. What's the solution? Boosting our "supply side", our ability to produce goods and services, is the optimal way of bringing down inflation while boosting growth. The chancellor announced a number of policies in his latest budget, including a package of childcare measures to support growth, but these will need considerable time to take effect. This brings us to the final party in the blame game. Ultimately, the Bank of England has no choice but to bring down demand. Many of today's mortgage-holders didn't witness the cost in inaction of the Seventies. Jerome Powell, chairman of the Federal Reserve, was right last week when he said that "there may be social costs associated with restoring price stability, the social costs of failing to restore price stability will be higher". Britain's central bank faces the choice of being unpopular today by delivering a mild recession or being deeply unpopular in the future by having to create a deep recession. This is the sad reality of our inflation situation and the Bank of England should not be blamed for doing its job. Karen Ward is chief market strategist for Europe, the Middle East and Africa at JP Morgan Asset Management 'We're experiencing a classic case of excess demand - too much money chasing too few goods and services' Load-Date: July 4, 2023  End of Document
