   Dublin funding for students in NI to avail of EU programme hailed Belfast Telegraph July 28, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 500 words Byline: Katherine Donnelly Body   NEWS the Irish government is paying for students from this side of the border to continue to go on Erasmus+ international study and work trips following Brexit has been welcomed. The Republic's further and higher education minister, Simon Harris, has allocated (EURO)2m in funding for this year, and the support will stay in place indefinitely. It is the second major initiative announced this week where Dublin is filling funding gaps in Northern Ireland higher education that have resulted, directly or indirectly, from Brexit. Erasmus+ is an EU programme, and students in the UK lost access to it as a result of Brexit. The SDLP's Sinead McLaughlin said after the Brexit referendum there was serious concern about the impact leaving the EU would have on students here wishing to take part in Erasmus+ studies. "Young people here have been afforded amazing opportunities to work, study and live abroad for many decades and it was unthinkable that would be robbed away from them," Ms McLaughlin added. "The Irish Government's decision to step up and provide this funding will open a wealth of opportunities for a new generation of young people across the North. "The experience of studying and living abroad brings huge benefits to young people. "It helps them develop new skills and build new connections with peers from across Europe, and all while growing their intercultural understanding and awareness." In 2020, the Irish Government committed to ensuring students in Northern Ireland could continue to avail of the programme. Yesterday's funding announcement fulfils that pledge. Mr Harris said it was "a permanent commitment, and will be in place for as long as students in Northern Ireland wish to avail of this option or an alternative mobility model emerges". He said the cost would be around (EURO)2m a year based on the current numbers of students from here accessing Erasmus+. "It is an investment in relationships between institutions north and south. It is an investment in our island's next generation, and I think it's a really practical, sensible way of continuing to co-operate post-Brexit," he said. The minister said that during his many engagements over the border, including with the universities' vice-chancellors, the loss of access to Erasmus+ was constantly raised. "I understand that. We know that students' higher education experiences are enriched by undertaking a mobility in another country," he said. Mr Harris said participation in Erasmus+ was not just about learning in a partner university, but also about building relationships with other students, and increasing cultural awareness and understanding. While the funding will be directed to study and internships across Europe, there is a significant north-south dimension, with more than 20% of Northern Ireland Erasmus+ internships taking place in the Republic, including in key sectors such as financial services and technology. "This experience is vital, and aligns skills development with the island economy," Mr Harris said. Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
