   Europe looks to build bridges beyond Russia The Business Times Singapore June 1, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 SPH Media Holdings Pte. Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: OPINION Length: 1128 words Byline: By Andrew Hammond, Europe looks to build bridges beyond Russia Body   THE new European Political Community (EPC) of almost 50 nations has generated much media interest since its formation in 2022, yet its fundamental economic and geopolitical purpose remains unclear in what is an already crowded continental institutional landscape.  Amid the massive, shared economic and political challenges facing the presidents and prime ministers when they convene in Moldova on Thursday (Jun 1), it is still uncertain whether the new "club of nations" will be a significant moment in Europe's decades-long integration project. Or perhaps it will be little more than a footnote in history.  These core questions of mandate and relevance will be tackled again this week as 47 leaders from greater Europe, plus those from countries including Israel and Turkey, meet in the Eastern European nation of Moldova. Odessa in Ukraine is only 200 km from the summit venue in Chisinau, and it is therefore fitting that the ongoing Russian invasion of that nation will frame the discussion, with a possibility that President Volodymyr Zelensky may attend given his recent rounds of shuttle diplomacy.   Perhaps the key question facing the leaders is how such a vast grouping of both the 27 European Union (EU) members and non-EU members can best work together economically and politically in common cause on "hard" issues such as security, post-Russia's invasion. Plus urgent, "softer" ones too, like energy and climate.   The 47 states that have been invited to Thursday's big meeting include 20 non-EU powers such as the United Kingdom, Norway, Switzerland, Ukraine, Israel and Turkey. Given the disparate nature of the nations in attendance, the group includes some bilateral foes, not just friends, such as Turkey and Greece, Armenia and Azerbaijan, and not to mention controversial, polarising leaders such as Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Turkey's newly re-elected President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.   While the new body's mission is not yet 100 per cent clear, the early expectation is that it will convene twice a year, including a meeting in Spain later in 2023. The 2024 summit will be symbolically staged in the United Kingdom, the only nation ever to leave the EU. The goal is to address issues that preoccupy all the states, including pressing security, energy and immigration challenges.  A key aim for many of the 27 EU states is to embrace accession countries, some of which like Turkey are losing patience in their very long wait for membership of the bloc. Doing so might counter attempts by Russia and China to gain influence in the continent, especially in its southern and eastern fringes.  The future of EU relationsAnother driver of the new EPC is Brexit, given that this development created a new non-EU power in Western Europe. This is already changing the EU's relationship with other non-EU European countries, including Norway, Switzerland, Turkey, Lichtenstein and non-EU states in the Balkans.  Each of these states has developed relations with the EU that -- most obviously in the cases of Norway and Switzerland, but also to a lesser extent others like Turkey -- were intended as a means to the end of eventual EU membership, or at least closer relations with the EU.   Brexit has not (yet) thrown these processes into reverse, with eventual accession to the Brussels-based club remaining an option. But it does open up new possibilities for future relationships centred around continued non-membership. Decision-makers in these states have used the Brexit vote as an opportunity to raise questions about the future of their relations with the EU.   There has been some limited discussion whether Brexit might open opportunities for a radical overhaul of Europe's institutional architecture. Such ambitious plans have faded, but they do point to opportunities for future change, potentially via the EPC. For strong advocates of the EPC such as French President Emmanuel Macron, the body could also serve as a potential bridge to a larger EU and a framework for more permanent continental integration. The EPC could start this process by building a consensus between participating states and the EU.  Take the example of energy where cooperative frameworks could be developed where there is, for instance, a possibility of signing more natural gas and wider energy agreements, with Norway building upon the recent bilateral "Green Alliance" agreed with the EU, plus constructing green hydrogen infrastructure across the region.   Another example is security and defence partnerships, where the war in Ukraine has exposed the weakness of Europe's existing architecture and highlighted the need for European countries to cooperate more, including in areas such as counterterrorism and cybersecurity.  Such reform may be needed to deal with wider global trends impacting the region. Europe already feels the pull of different world powers, including the United States and China, and it also struggles locally with the geopolitical disruptions of Russia.   This global multipolarity has brought greater uncertainty to Europe, with the geopolitical terrain becoming all the more complex. If population projections hold, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Russia may be among the most populous countries in Europe by mid-century, with the EU thereby in the midst of large states with competing agendas.  Russian challengesEven before the invasion of Ukraine, Russia posed the most challenges for the EU. Post-pandemic and Brexit, Moscow had hoped that the EU 27 would have a period of introspection with resources and time spent dealing with internal issues, meaning Brussels would be more distracted from key international matters.   However, that has not proven to be the case so far, and the EU is about to launch its 11th round of sanctions against Moscow following its invasion of Ukraine. Building from this, one of the key deliverables of the EPC summit may be reconfirmation of the 1975 Helsinki principles, including territorial integrity and respect for the sovereignty of all countries. The new community could thus come to resemble a version 2.0 of the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe -- that is, a group of like-minded countries united in their rejection of Russia's revanchism.  So what Thursday's summit will showcase is that the EU and the wider community of nations in the EPC face first-order challenges that include ongoing pressure from Russia. In particular, how the Brussels-based club of 27 states responds in coming years will not just frame future relations with key non-EU states including the United Kingdom and Turkey, but also determine its wider place in the world vis-a-vis global powers like the United States and China.  The writer is an associate at LSE IDEAS at the London School of Economics.  Graphic    The core questions of mandate and relevance will be tackled again at the second EPC summit in Moldova, on Jun 1. PHOTO: AFP Load-Date: May 31, 2023  End of Document
