   Fifty questions Sunak should answer before an election... but won't i-news September 4, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 1650 words Byline: Hugo Gye Body   As the UK prepares for the next general election, political leaders will be increasingly keen to press their chosen messages home as they seek to convince voters to back them. Here are the key questions that Prime Minister Rishi Sunak should answer, and why he probably won't. 1. Is the Conservative Party under your leadership more interested in fostering community or promoting freedom? There is an ideological battle within the Tories about whether to promote liberalism and free markets, or return to pre-Thatcherite notions of conservatism - Rishi Sunak has not yet indicated which side he is on. 2. How can you understand what the voter needs when your family is thousands of times more wealthy than the average UK household? The Prime Minister and his wife, Akshata Murty, are one of the wealthiest couples in Britain, with an estimated £730m fortune, and he has often been accused of being out of touch with the struggles of the general public. 3. How can we trust you when you betrayed your own leader, Boris Johnson? Many Tory activists The of Wales like to and MPs have not forgiven Mr Sunak for resigning from Mr Johnson's Cabinet. 4. Could Boris Johnson ever return to the front benches under your leadership? The former prime minister has hinted he could one day return to politics. 5. Did Liz Truss have a point when she said you had no plan for growth? Mr Sunak has stabilised the economy but has not set out a strategy to boost GDP. 6. Which group of voters do you consider more important, the 'Red Wall' or 'Blue Wall'? Some polling experts believe the Conservatives cannot continue to appeal to both. 7. What will you do to help older people pay for social care? The introduction of a comprehensive strategy to help the elderly pay for care has been repeatedly delayed. 8. Are you happy with everything Suella Braverman has done as Home Secretary? The Prime Minister often declines to endorse her comments and decisions, without going as far as to oppose them. 9. Should asylum seekers be able to apply for refugee status in the UK from another country? One reason migrants cross the English Channel in small boats is that, other than for a handful of groups, it is not possible to put in an asylum claim unless you are already in the UK. 10. Has Brexit been as successful as you thought it would be when you campaigned for it? Mr Sunak claims to be optimistic about Britain's future outside the EU, but so far, Brexit appears to have harmed the economy and imposed red tape on businesses. percentage in would see an 11. Is there a place for Remainers in the Conservative Party? Mr Johnson purged anti-Brexit Tory MPs such as Rory Stewart, and it is not yet clear whether he is ready to welcome them back. 12. How will you improve travel to Europe, such as reducing queues at ports? For many Britons, the most obvious effect of Brexit is disruption when they travel to the continent. 13. Will the UK ever be able to strike a free-trade agreement with the US, and if so should it? A US trade deal has been on ice since Joe Biden became President. 14. Does the fall in donations to the Conservative Party show you have already lost the confidence of business, and the next election? Labour's fundraising is outstripping that of the Tories . 15. Do you believe climate change is one of the biggest threats facing the UK? Mr Sunak claims he remains committed to the "net zero" agenda but has signalled a shift away from green policies. 16. Will you extend the 2030 deadline for the ban on sales of diesel and petrol cars? It is only seven years until it will be illegal to sell any cars with internal combustion engines. 17. Will you keep or scrap the energy price cap? The price cap did not stop energy costs from soaring last year and is blamed for keeping bills high. 18. What will you do to stop the pollution of Britain's rivers? Campaigners want a crackdown in the regulation of water companies. 19. Will you allow onshore windfarms? Mr Sunak has retained a de facto ban on onshore wind. 20. How many nuclear power stations will you build, and when? The Government's stated commitment to new nuclear has not yet resulted in the confirmation of any new power stations. 21. How long will the windfall tax on energy companies stay for? The Prime Minister has been under pressure to strengthen the existing windfall tax. 22. What will you do to ensure the UK is a world leader in AI technology? Mr Sunak has put AI at the centre of his vision for the future, but the US and China have a big head start. 23. How worried are you about the risk that AI could wipe out humanity? If experts who worry about the existential risk of AI are correct, it is the most important long-term danger facing the world. 24. When will you cut the overall tax burden? As Chancellor and Prime Minister, Sunak has allowed the tax burden to grow to a record peacetime level. 25. Is it fair that capital gains tax is so much lower than income tax? Gains from wealth attract a much lower level of tax than income from work. 26. Should the Bank of England's inflation target remain at 2 per cent? There is little immediate prospect of inflation returning to the 2 per cent level the Bank of England is supposed to target and some economists believe it will eventually settle at a permanently higher plateau. 27. Is the triple lock justified in an era of high inflation? The income of retired people will have grown much faster than that of workers over the first half of this decade because their pensions are linked to rising inflation. 28. Can you guarantee the pension age will not be raised again? With an ageing population politicians may conclude that they have to keep raising the state pension age to keep the system affordable. 29. Should the two-child cap on child benefit be permanent? The Conservatives introduced the two-child cap despite concerns from some of their supporters that it is one factor suppressing the country's birth rate. 30. The number of people on disability benefit has increased - is there any way to reverse that? The reason for a significant increase in the number of people claiming disability remains unclear but the problem is contributing to labour shortages. 31. Is the NHS sustainable in light of its ever-growing cost? The health service has been claiming an increasing proportion of the money available to fund public services, ever since it was founded. 32. How will you reduce NHS waiting lists? Ministers have admitted they expect the lists to climb further from their current record high. 33. Will you build 40 new hospitals by 2030? This was a key manifesto promise at the last election but the programme appears to be in serious trouble. 34. Should local councils continue to get a veto over individual planning applications? Some campaigners for planning reform believe that the only way to encourage housebuilding is to remove the individual veto. 35. Will you finish HS2, and run it to Leeds as well as Manchester? The "eastern leg" of High Speed 2 rail is in limbo and may never be built. 36. Will you build 'northern powerhouse rail' from Liverpool to Hull? This ambitious transportation project, promised by Mr Johnson, is at risk of being downgraded. 37. Do you want Britain to have a larger manufacturing sector, and what is your industrial strategy to make that happen? Industry leaders complain that the lack of a proper long-term industrial strategy is holding the UK back. 38. When will you produce trans guidance for schools? This guidance has been promised for months but as the new school year begins, teachers still do not know what is expected of them when dealing with transgender pupils. 39. What will you do to improve conviction rates for rape? It has proven stubbornly difficult to ensure that survivors of rape see their attackers brought to justice. 40. Should all European countries that want to join Nato be allowed to? Allowing Ukraine and Georgia, among others, to join Nato would support countries in vulnerable positions but risk enraging the Russian government. 41. Should the UK intervene to help Taiwan if it is attacked or invaded by China? Britain has long maintained a stance of strategic ambiguity over Taiwan but an attack is more likely. 42. At what point would you support a negotiated peace deal to end the Ukraine war? Mr Sunak has been a staunch supporter of Ukraine's military effort. 43. Under what circumstances would you authorise another referendum on Scottish independence? The Conservatives say any referendum should be "once in a generation" but will not put a precise figure on how many years that means. 44. Will you impose direct rule on Northern Ireland if the parties cannot form a government? The Prime Minister's "Windsor Framework" breakthrough on post- Brexit trade rules has not achieved its goal of restoring power-sharing at Stormont. 45. Under what circumstances would you authorise a referendum on Welsh independence? Support for Welsh independence has reached as high as 39 per cent in recent years. 46. How will you improve standards of behaviour in Parliament? Bad behaviour by Conservative MPs has led to a number of damaging by-elections. 47. Does the House of Lords need reform? Mr Sunak has never expressed a strong view about the future of the second chamber. 48. Why have you repeatedly failed to be transparent about your family's finances? The Prime Minister's wife held non-domiciled tax status when he was Chancellor. 49. What is your plan to stop government spending, and therefore taxation, going up and up indefinitely? Over time, spending has increased - even in the austerity era - but so has concern about the quality of services. 50. What is the point of holding power if you don't want to implement radical economic policies? Mr Sunak has said little concrete about his vision for the economy in the long term, instead focusing on crisis management. 39 The percentage of people in Wales who would like to see an independent Cymru Load-Date: September 3, 2023  End of Document
