   George Kerevan: Britain-s calamity is Scotland-s opportunity The National (Scotland) July 24, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 1254 words Byline: George Kerevan Body   THE mother of Labour-s youthful 25-year-old victor in the Selby and Ainsty by-election, Keir (for Hardie) Mather, says he could become prime minister someday. The poor boy must be embarrassed. Such an unwanted encomium is always the kiss of death in politics, especially if it-s from your mum. Loads of other would-be Labour hopefuls will now be out to see the young Keir gets cut down to size. For in British parliamentary circles, your enemies are usually in your own party ranks - as Angus Brendan MacNeil can attest. Invoking the totemic name of Keir Hardie yet again reminds us that the great man and founder of the Labour Party never became PM. The first Labour leader to enter Number 10 was Hardie-s sidekick Ramsay MacDonald - a youthful proponent of Scottish Home Rule who ended up in coalition with the Tories, on a platform of not being reckless with public finances. READ MORE: Keir Starmer claims victory in Labour policy battle Remind you of anyone? Hardie himself died of lung disease contracted in his mining days - and of a broken heart after Labour MPs supported joining the carnage of the Great War. An imperialist war justified in the name of saving plucky little Belgium from Prussian imperialism. All of which is to say that last Thursday-s three by-elections have provided no proof that the other Keir in Labour politics - Sir Keir Starmer - is any more a shoo-in to Downing Street than young master Mather. In politics, especially of the broken British variety, there are more slips betwixt cup and lips than anyone can image. Witness Labour-s massive own goal in failing to win the Uxbridge and South Ruislip by-election - the seat Boris Johnson had quit in a fit of pique. Starmer only needed a gentle swing to capture Uxbridge and pointedly failed to get it. Which suggests that the outcome of the next General Election is still in contest. Voters hate the Tories, but they don-t much like Starmer-s Labour either If Britain did not have a first-past-the-post electoral system, UK politics would now be vulnerable from both the right and left to new parties emerging to replace the traditional Conservative-Labour duopoly. As it is, both the technocrat Sunak and the technocrat Starmer are desperately trying to preserve the constitutional status quo. As we speak, Labour stand a moderate chance of gaining a majority in next year-s General Election. Starmer has cast himself not as a reformer or a champion of social democratic redistribution but as the guy who will restore -normalcy-. But normality is one thing that has disappeared for good in post-Brexit, divided, economically decrepit Britain. Recently, Starmer has been trying to paint himself with some of the aura of the late, unlamented Tony Blair, Labour-s last effective vote-winner. Both men are ambitious lawyers. But the differences between Blair and Starmer are glaring. Blair is greasy charm personified; Starmer is the wettest of wet fish who can-t excite voters. Blair is the supreme opportunist; Starmer, the former Trot, is actually quite ideological - because (like Gordon Brown) it gives him a sense of moral superiority. READ MORE: Labour-s ongoing media issue, a Ming vase - and Laurel and Hardy Perhaps surprisingly, Starmer-s ideological bent hampers his ability to act. Remember it was the opportunistic Blair who forced a reluctant chancellor Gordon Brown to pump extra billions into the NHS. Brown, like Starmer, was wedded to a conservative (small -c-) fiscal policy. The chances of Starmer fixing the English NHS are a fat zero. I dare say Labour will come out of yesterday-s National Policy Forum - which has no policy-making teeth whatsoever when it comes to writing the Labour election manifesto - with a few electoral sweeties. There will be vague promises regarding extending free school meals in England - subject to -restoring public finances-. There may be even vaguer references to removing the benefit cap, maybe around the time hell freezes over. There could even be a reminder that Labour is platonically in favour of some form of gentle rent controls, so long as they are ineffective in reality. One might ask why the trades unions and the Labour left (what remains of it) bother? The grand project of winning Labour for the left was actually achieved under Jeremy Corbyn. And though everyone has done their best to forget it, a strategic shift in only 2500 votes across the UK in the 2017 General Election would have put Corbyn in Number 10. But the Labour right had no intention of allowing a Corbyn government and did everything they could to sabotage his electoral chances. To ensure the Labour left is neutered forever, Starmer has exiled Corbyn from the party and systematically expelled oppositionists. There is no effective left in the party any longer. Witness the rise of clueless wonders such as Keir Mather. The Labour left has quietly embraced suicide as a radical force by allowing Starmer the freedom to recast Labour as the party of order, of fiscal rectitude, and of a return to traditional politics in the aftermath of Brexit and Tory infighting. Starmer is boring because boring is what Labour is now offering the British elites and British economic establishment after a decade of Tory chaos - above all the unexpected, unplanned hurricane that is Brexit. READ MORE: Keir Starmer cannot choose, and therefore cannot govern But making Labour into the party that will -restore- the old, pre-Brexit order demanded the surgical removal of what-s left of Labour-s radical soul. Keir Hardie must be spinning in his grave. Here is a glimmer of good news - the Starmer project will fail to restore the old British status quo. The Del Boy, spiv-dominated British economy is being crushed by its economic competitors. Starmer will hesitate to take the radical state interventionist policies required to change course. The economic crisis will accentuate the political one. Meanwhile, the Tory Party will continue to fission, giving rise to ever more populist-nationalist currents. At some point (surely) the English Labour left will realise the game is up and split definitively from the Starmerite clones. Keir Starmer and Keir Mather are merely a stop on the road to Labour-s eventual organic split. Britain-s calamity is Scotland-s opportunity. Not because I wish England ill, but because British society is trapped in a timewarp, economically and constitutionally. Thatcherism privatised nearly everything and created an insecure, market-driven society with no values except making a fast buck. Result: living standards have dropped, the banks and moneymen are a law to themselves, the NHS is on life support, and the UK Parliament is a pointless exercise (as SNP MPs are proving by bailing out). READ MORE: Anas Sarwar urged to come clean on two-child cap policy stance Brexit has only added to the chaos. Somebody has to break the knot. And that somebody is Scotland. We need a fresh start which independence will provide for us - and for England too. But a word of caution. Scottish independence is not about restoring a pre-Brexit, liberal idyll that somehow the Tories disrupted. It is about building a new nation, with a new economy. It involves duties as well as rights, sacrifice as well as gain. Meanwhile the Scottish Starmerites are trying to have their political cake and eat it. Scottish Labour are trying to win favour with SNP voters by claiming they oppose Starmer-s retention of the Tory two-child benefits cap. Big deal. Starmer will keep the cap whatever Anas Sarwar says. Because Labour are the new conservatives. Load-Date: July 24, 2023  End of Document
