   Germany criticises Ukraine counter-attack as too slow The Daily Telegraph (London) July 26, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1 Length: 2179 words Byline: James Jackson Body   UKRAINE'S counter-offensive is failing to make progress because its army is not fully implementing the training it has received from the West, according to a leaked German intelligence assessment. Kyiv is spreading its troops out too thinly across the 600-mile front line and attacking in units composed of too few men, the confidential document obtained by Bild newspaper states. Ukrainian soldiers trained by the West are showing "great learning success" but they are let down by com manders who have not been through the boot camps, the report claims. It states that the Ukrainian military favours promoting soldiers with combat experience over those who have received Nato-standard instruction. Commanders can therefore show "considerable deficiencies in leadership" which lead to "wrong and dangerous decisions", the military file claims. The Ukrainian armed forces had not responded to the report last night. Senior British military figures criticised the leak and its conclusions, saying it did not "help" anyone to "unduly criticise Ukraine." According to the Bundeswehr assessment, Ukraine is sacrificing its advantage in manpower by attacking in units of between 10 and 30 men, insufficient to break through Russian lines. It adds that the small unit-sizes increase the risk of friendly fire and fail to group together enough Western-trained soldiers to be operationally effective. A senior defence source told The Daily Telegraph: "There have obviously been instances where the Ukrainians have done things differently, but I would argue that they have tried to implement their Western training beyond what might be deemed tolerable given certain tactical situations." "They [Ukrainians] certainly have plenty of problems, but I don't think this German accusation is one of them," the defence source said. "The idea they are abusing the formations we have trained them in doesn't ring true to me," the source added. It came as Rishi Sunak shared intelligence with Ukraine that Russia may attack civilian ships in the Black Sea, escalating its campaign to throttle trade. Lord Dannatt, the former head of the Dame Alison. Whether the two discussed Mr Farage, neither is prepared to say. prompted a huge response on social media from people ridiculing Mr Farage's claim - now substantiated - that he had been targeted for political rather than financial reasons . What is known, however, is that the next day, July 4, Mr Jack published an exclusive story on The BBC website headlined: "Nigel Farage bank account shut for falling below wealth limit." It quoted 'people familiar with' Coutts' move" claiming that it had been a "commercial" decision to close Mr Coutts, below, cancelled Nigel Farage's bank account 'without exlanation' he said British Army, said: "I've seen criticism that the West have not delivered all anti-mine equipment as promised, so we need to be patient with Ukraine and encourage and support them to do their best." Reputational risks Among them was Jon Sopel, the former BBC reporter and now host of the News Agents podcast, who said at the time: "You must feel a bit of a Charlie if you're Nigel Farage, and you claim that it's all an establishment stitch up that your account's been closed when it's just you're not rich enough for Coutt's. "Am thinking of starting a 'go fund me' page for Nige to get him his account back." PA LUCY NORTH/ While Coutts closed Nigel Farage's account because his views did not "align" with their values, other figures linked to the private bank have caused far greater controversy. Gen Pinochet Augusto Pinochet, ex-dictator Chile, account US branch Coutts, and among banks, $15 million (£7.8 was behind execution disappearance 3,000 Mr Farage does not dispute that his finances dipped below the Coutts threshold of £3million in savings or £1m in borrowing or investment, but says the bank had never made an issue of it in the past. ALAMY; MELIA/ The document obtained by him also makes clear that he was considered a commercially viable customer . MICHAEL Ukrainian leaders have admitted that the offensive has made only limited advances, with a dense network of Russian mines hampering a breakthrough. Top executive who handled the leader's account is an avowed However, Volodymyr Zelensky, the Ukrainian president, last week said the offensive would "gain pace" shortly amid growing alarm in Western capitals. By Neil Johnston senior news reporter A TOP executive at Coutts who handled Nigel Farage's bank account is an avowed Remainer who has judged a diversity essay prize. and commercial clients, described herself as a "Remainer" and said she believed Brexit damaged the economy. The 50-year-old, who sits on Coutts's executive committee, has embraced its pivot towards saving the planet and putting diversity at the heart of the business. revealed that Mr Farage's accountwas closed because staffon the bank's reputational risk committee "did not think continuing to bank NF [Nigel Farage] was compatible with Coutts given his publicly stated views that were at odds with our position as an inclusive organisation". The committee reports directly to the chief to the unclear committee, Mr Farage's replied subject Mr calls and Camilla Stowell, the bank's managing director and head of private On Tuesday, the Daily telegraph About 100 square miles of territory and nine villages have been recaptured since the launch of the push almost two months ago. policies scandal . Scandal exposes 'sinister nature of diversity Continued from Page 1 to the interests of its customers and treat them fairly", will be updated to refer to political beliefs, INSIDErs said. It will also say that banks must give three months' notice of services being terminated and due notice must be given to enable appeals. the customer provide, and can direct the bank to reopen the account if they feel the customer has been unfairly treated. Equity & Inclusion industry. Apparently anyone who wants to control our borders & stop the boats can be branded 'xenophobic' & have their bank account closed in the name of 'inclusivity'. "NatWest & other corporates who have naively adopted this politically biased dogma need a major rethink. This is also an issue for the public sector too, which is why I'm reviewing our policies at the Home Office." "The Payment Accounts Regulations in the UK, which are transposed from European Union laws, say... you are not able to discriminate on the basis of political views. That's in the legislation. "As you would expect, we are talking to NatWest Group about this." Grant said: "I I don't Nigel speech domestic "What these which is politically actually "People accounts or shouldn't on that A Coutts the customer Mr Rathi told the Treasury select committee the law is clear that banks cannot discriminate on political views. He said that if Mr Farage contacted the Financial Ombudsman Service and it found against the bank, the FCA could investigate. Mr Farage said he has not yet had time to write to the Ombudsman but will be doing so. He said that if Mr Farage's complaint was upheld by the Ombudsman, "of course it would be relevant for us from a supervisory perspective". Mr Rathi added: "We would obviously be concerned if they'd been in breach of Data Protection." Many in Kyiv's army feel they are being pressured to sacrifice large numbers of men without sufficient weap onry, such as F-16 jets and long-range missile systems, to protect them. Several Mr Farage is thought to be just one of thousands of people who have been denied bank accounts for political reasons. They include children of littleknown Tory peers who were told they could not have a bank account after being asked about their parents. There are now calls for senior executives of Coutts and NatWest to be summoned before a parliamentary committee to explain their actions, their Mr Rathi said: "Anybody who feels that their bank has not treated them fairly can go to the Financial Ombudsman Service, who will look at the information the bank and Yesterday, Mrs Braverman said on Twitter: "The Coutts scandal exposes the sinister nature of much of the Diversity, Ukraine analysts have noted that their country's progress is being hampered by a failure to implement "combined arms warfare" on a large scale, where infantry, armoured vehicles and artillery operate as one. the of an with the of Miami, other LLANQUIN account holders have included Mafia bosses, embezzlers and dictators Mafia millions Emilio Di Giovine. the Mafia leader, laundered nearly £2 million of cash through his Coutts account, according to The Guardian in 1999. The boss of the 'Ndrangheta, one of Italy's wealthiest crime syndicates, served eight years in jail in the 1990s. Human rights abuses Hosni Mubarak, the former Egyptian president and his sons, were also clients within the same branch, the newspaper reported in 2016. Mubarak oversaw "systematic" violations of human rights by the security services in Egypt, according to Amnesty International, and he was sentenced to a three-year prison term for embezzlement of public funds. SANTIAGO AP PHOTO/ He the and of Gen Pinochet of Chile had an account in the US at the Miami branch of Coutts The German report claimed that Western-trained soldiers understood "the operational principles of fire and movement" but that when they returned to Ukraine they would often be commanded by officers who used different military tactics. former Ukip Remainer questions on her role in decisions around Mr Farage's accounts , she has previously suggested problems with clients would come across her desk. In an interview with The Purpose Made Podcast last summer, Ms Stowell was asked whether there needed to be a "conversation sooner or later in respect of Brexit" and the economy. She said: "Personally, I was a Remainer. So I fear that, yes, we know Brexit is having an impact, but we can't really quantify it because there are so many forces at play as well." She added that it was "difficult to isolate the impact" of Brexit. executive's office, according annual report. It is Ms Stowell sits on the but she has been point of contact and behalf of the lender to his access request . he was first told his account was closing. He added he felt the calls were "very condescending". Ms Stowell attended the Cop26 summit for Coutts. She was also a judge for a diversity essay prize run by the bank, in conjunction with Eton, for children in the Thames Valley. While Coutts has refused to answer Ms Stowell suggested that changes from Brexit had led to a shortage of workers in the UK. "The difference, said he had several phone emails with Ms Stowell since German military leaders also expressed frustration at experienced fighters being promoted over Westerntrained troops, with the report claiming "combat experience does not mean that the soldier is a good leader in combat." industry' Starmer offers no support the extent of the de-banking Shapps, the Energy Secretary, it is absolutely disgraceful. to agree with everything says to recognise that free a very important part of our life. Novak Djokovic, the former Wimbledon champion, as evidence that he was not as "inclusive" as The Bank's. By Daniel Martin SIR KEIR STARMER yesterday refused to support Nigel Farage over the apparent closure of his bank account for political reasons . Asked whether Sir Keir believed it was unacceptable for a private bank to close the account of a person because of their political views, his spokesman said: "I think it would be fair to say we just don't know enough information at this stage. A spokesman for the Labour leader said the situation was "contested" and that it was not appropriate to Comment. It emerged on Tuesday that the former Ukip leader "'s bank accounts were closed after Coutts decided his views "do not align with our values". has happened with some of through this regime, known as the PEP regime, or exposed people, is really scandalous. "Clearly, the position as had been initially reported is now contested and so therefore it wouldn't be appropriate to speculate on what has or hasn't happened." shouldn't have their bank closed because of their political other view. And banks be refusing to open accounts as well." A reputational risk committee at the bank "exited" him after considering a dossier detailing Mr Farage's Comments about Brexit, his friendship with Donald Trump and views on LGBT rights as among many reasons he was not " compatible with Coutts". Sergei Sumlenny, founder of the Berlin-based European Resilience Initiative Centre think tank, dismissed the report as "typical German arrogance". It came after another Labour frontbencher refused to come out in support of Mr Farage over the apparent closure of his account. Alex Norris, shadow minister for levelling up, said it was too early to come to any conclusions until an investigation had taken place. spokesman said: "We recognise interest] in this case. We cannot on the detail given our confidentiality obligations." The background briefing paper referred to Mr Farage's support for 'They have tried to implement their Western training beyond what might be deemed tolerable' Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
