   Gibraltar airport as a stumbling block for the negotiation of an agreement that is dragging on CE Noticias Financieras English June 27, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1114 words Body    For a moment it was thought that everything was done and that the announcement of white smoke would be immediate. But negotiations have run aground and the agreement on Gibraltar - in limbo since Brexit left it outside the EU - now seems more complicated than ever.  The Rock's governor, David Steel, accuses Spain of being responsible for the impasse by having asked for "a regulatory framework on the management of the airport that implies its Spanish jurisdiction," something he considers intolerable as it directly affects the sovereignty issue. "In the 2020 New Year's Eve Framework Agreement the sovereignty issue was left aside. Now Spain has reintroduced it," stresses the representative of the British Crown in Gibraltar to The Times.  On New Year's Eve 2020, a few hours before the end of the transition period, Brexit, London and Madrid managed to close 'in extremis' a principle of agreement to avoid the strict controls on the only land border -along with that of Ireland- that now unites the UK with the EU. The text contained the guidelines to close a treaty between the European Commission and the United Kingdom on the Rock. But this is only a temporary solution that can be rescinded at any time.  If there is to be flexibility at the fence, the Schengen border must be outsourced to the Rock's port and airport. But that requires the presence of agents from Spain (Schengen member). And therein lies the crux of the matter. Especially considering that the land where the airport is built was not contemplated in the Treaty of Utrecht (1713-1715). The British got hold of it in the 19th century, when epidemics forced the population to move to the isthmus.  The sources consulted about the negotiations had always been practically hermetic, fearful that any revelation could muddy the waters. Hence, the statements of a figure with the weight of Steel, who rarely speaks to the press, are now attracting a great deal of attention. There are many who interpret this as a British strategy with the aim of attracting the attention of Brussels to speed up talks that are now at an impasse.  After London and Brussels managed to put an end to the controversy over the Northern Ireland Protocol last February, with all the complexities that entails for a territory of difficult coexistence between Catholics and Protestants, it was thought that the necessary momentum would be achieved to resolve the issue of the Rock, the last outstanding Brexit dispute.  At the beginning of the year, optimism reigned, but in the end the white smoke did not arrive and the elections for July 23 only complicate matters. In the United Kingdom there is concern that an eventual PP government with Vox could hinder the path. The British newspaper presents the ranks of Santiago Abascal as a far-right party that "has previously called for the closure of the land border of Gibraltar with Spain to suffocate the territory and regain sovereignty".  "If they come to power, the pact is practically dead," a senior Spanish official assures The Times on condition of anonymity. For its part, a spokesman for the British government said Tuesday that the agreement must wait until after the appointment with the polls in Spain and insisted that"will not do anything to compromise British sovereignty" of the colony.  About 30,000 people cross the fence every day. Among them, 15,000 workers, of which 10,000 are Spaniards from an area such as the Campo de Gibraltar, where rarely goes below an unemployment rate of 30%. So the Brexit forces Madrid and the Rock to find a pragmatic solution of coexistence. Although the ghost of the 'no deal' is always there.  In the negotiations there is talk of "a zone of shared prosperity", a euphemism to avoid talking about sovereignty over the British colony. But it is sovereignty, after all, that has set the context for the last 300 years. And the issue that, in the end, now hinders the longed-for white smoke. Nobody wants to close a fence that would shake both the economy of the Rock and the surrounding Spanish regions. But, at the same time, nobody wants to sign any term, any point, any comma that could affect the sovereignty issue in an international treaty.  The Foreign Minister, Jose Manuel Albares, has stressed several times that the framework of the 'New Year's Eve agreement' provides that Spain, as a member of Schengen, would be responsible for ensuring the standards of this space and therefore should assume the controls at the port and airport of the Rock, although it would have the support of the European border agency -Frontex- for a transitional period of four years.  However, the governor of Gibraltar now points out that the UK must ensure that the presence of Frontex agents at the border "does not stretch to sovereignty, that it does not go beyond what we can accept in terms of jurisdiction and control". "The importance of Gibraltar now is greater than it has been for 40 years, since the end of the Cold War," Steel says. "With a resurgent Russia and an assertive China, its strategic importance as an entry point for the Atlantic and the Mediterranean is obvious," he qualifies.  The Spanish government believes that "the ball is in the UK's court" when it comes to deciding on the proposal put forward last year by Spain and the European Commission to make a shared prosperity zone on the Rock. He believes that it is London and in particular the government of Gibraltar who are responsible for the stalemate in the negotiations.  For his part, Fabian Picardo, Gibraltar's prime minister, is optimistic "if the issues on the table do not mean that either side has to lose on a matter of fundamental importance." "The only time I would be an obstacle to progress is when the proposed issue is like sovereignty, jurisdiction or control and then I will not only be difficult, I will be the stumbling block on which everything falls," he stresses.  In Brussels there is interest in getting the negotiations to move forward. It would not be understood to reach an agreement on Northern Ireland - infinitely more complex - and not on the Rock. In any case, it wants to give its place to Spain which, as a member of the bloc, managed to get the EU to guarantee it veto power for any agreement reached on the Rock. Madrid also got the EU to mention, for the first time, Gibraltar as a colony, thus joining the criterion that the UN has maintained on the territory since 1967.  For a moment it was thought that everything was done and that the announcement of white smoke would be immediate. But negotiations have run aground and the agreement on Gibraltar -in limbo since Brexit left it outside the EU- now seems more complicated than ever.  Load-Date: June 28, 2023  End of Document
