   Government has buckled under the weight of great expectations for budget Sunday Independent July 9, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS;NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 1121 words Byline: Richard Curran Body   Economists rarely make good politicians. And only occasionally do politicians think like economists. This chasm in mindsets was very obvious when the Irish Fiscal Advisory Council (IFAC) suggested the Government's plan for a big spending budget this October "undermines the credibility" of the Coalition. In whose eyes? Clearly it undermines it in the eyes of IFAC. But not so much in the eyes of voters who will criticise the Government for not giving them back even more of the windfall corporation taxes the country is attracting. And not so much in the eyes of opposition politicians, who only wish they were in power at a time when so many billions seem to be available to spend. The Government feels it has an election to win and Sinn Féin is breathing down its neck. But the advisory council is dead right to signal the warnings. After last year's budget, the IFAC said the Government plan to temporarily deviate from its 5pc spending increase rule was "sensible in view of the very high rates of inflation". It viewed it as sensible - as long as it was temporary. It welcomed the fact the Government said at the time that its intention was to return to normal application of the spending rule from next year. Well, that's not happening - and the intention looks shot to pieces, based on the summer economic statement published during the week. According to the IFAC, core spending will rise by around 6.4pc next year. The Government is planning a (EURO)6.4bn budget in October, made up of (EURO)1bn more spending than it signalled just three months ago, with (EURO)600m more in tax cuts than they previously flagged. "When one correctly accounts for the additional capital spending," said the IFAC, "the Government is planning to break the spending rule every year out to 2026." This is a dangerous game to play with the public finances, and not just because of the short-term injection all this spending and tax cuts could give to inflation. If you take away the windfall corporation taxes, the government finances look very different and a lot closer to a deficit. The dependence on uncertain corporation tax receipts is growing. In the budget for 2023 announced last autumn, the Government increased core current expenditure by (EURO)4.3bn. Overall core expenditure is set to increase in 2024 by (EURO)5.2bn. Assuming most of that will be growth in current expenditure, the Government will have added around (EURO)7bn or more to the cost of running the country in the space of two years. In his defence, Finance Minister Michael McGrath would argue that the population is growing and improvements in public services are badly needed. Getting the balance right is the tricky bit. A 5pc spending increase rule should be where the best balance is struck. Mistakes of the past naturally come to mind - and in truth, the circumstances are genuinely very different to the debt-fuelled bubble of the mid-Noughties, which collapsed the Exchequer finances when the crash came. However, voter expectations of what a government should do for them at a time of high inflation, record rents and house prices, haven't changed that much. The Coalition is feeling the weight of those expectations. INSTANT PAYMENTS APP IS A BIT OF A SLOW BURNER There is not whole lot 'instant' about the Irish banks' plans to develop an instant payments mobile app. Synch Payments, which is backed by the three main banks, has been trying for some time to get an app off the ground to rival Revolut and PayPal. It seems reasonable that an app backed by the only three full service banks left in the country should be scrutinised by the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC). Well it was, and it got the all-clear last summer. Now the Central Bank has got involved, saying it must authorise the new service. This will push back the launch of the product until next year - and at this stage you have to wonder whether it all has a slightly doomed feeling to it. It isn't the company's fault. You could almost hear the frustration from Synch Payments when it issued a statement confirming the Central Bank's decision to go through an approval process. "Synch has been engaged with the Central Bank of Ireland for some time to ascertain whether authorisation would be required and welcomes the certainty that the decision brings," it said. Clearly Synch was prepared to seek authorisation, once it got a concrete decision from the regulator that it was needed. Originally set up in 2021, it will be 2024 at the earliest before the app is up and running. Given the paucity of full-service banks, the arrival of Revolut and other fintech payments companies is welcome. But equally, having an opportunity for fresh competition for the new disruptors in the instant payments space would be good too. The banks are afraid that operators like Revolut are hoovering up potential future banking customers with a convenient and fast service. Synch will submit an application to the Central Bank for authorisation "as soon as possible", said its statement. The company was told it needed clearance under EU rules. It seems time moves slowly in the instant payments world. 'STEADY-HANDED' UK CAUGHT IN POST-BREXIT DOOM LOOP Fears of higher interest rates in the UK and the US pushed up bond yields during the week. Whatever about two-year US Treasury notes hitting their highest level since 2007, the situation for the UK looks a lot worse. There the cost of two-year money hit its highest level since 1998, while five-year money was more expensive than it's been since 2007. This has been achieved without Liz Truss or Kwasi Kwarteng, but under the supposedly steady hand of chancellor Jeremy Hunt and PM Rishi Sunak. The UK looks caught in a post-Brexit doom loop. In fact two-year borrowing costs for the UK are higher than for Italy or Greece. Investors are betting that UK interest rates will go all the way to 6.5pc by March next, which would be the highest rate since 1998. The problem is that expectations of higher interest rates is souring investor sentiment towards the UK. Inflation is not yet under control and sterling has weakened in recent weeks. Borrowing costs for Rishi Sunak will get higher, thereby reducing his ability to borrow his way through some post-Brexit problems. Brexit will get the blame from some quarters, while others will say nothing at all. Even opposition leader Keir Starmer isn't talking returning to the EU any time soon. There are two reasons for this. Firstly, it would take years to deliver, even if a decision was made in principle. Secondly, Brexit wasn't just a government policy. It was the result of a people's referendum. It's one thing to say the previous government were idiots, but the majority of the population? Not good politics. Graphic    Take away corporation tax and Michael McGrath is running close to a deficit Load-Date: July 9, 2023  End of Document
