   He trusted the instincts of the people over the Establishment ? and was never forgiven for it Mail on Sunday (London) June 10, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 965 words Byline: Daniel Johnson Body   HE CHANGED the course of history, but in the end they got him. Having dominated the political stage for a decade, Boris Johnson was brought down by the envy of Westminster and the spite of Whitehall. Boris was different. He was the first celebrity to become prime minister and there were always plenty of jealous parliamentary Lilliputians trying to tie down this Gulliver of politics. Boris was also the first to shun the Establishment's serpentine way of doing business, in favour of trusting the instincts of the public. He was never forgiven for either. When the history books come to be written, Boris Johnson will tower like a titan above his contemporaries, above all for delivering Brexit. Having won the referendum, then routed the naysayers who doubted Britain's ability to flourish outside the single market, Boris fought a general election on the simple slogan 'Get Brexit done'. He won by a landslide with a majority of 80 seats, while Labour collapsed. The new electoral map had Conservative MPs ? lots of them ? in regions where they had not been seen since the 1930s. To grasp the significance of the Johnsonian achievement, it is enough to try to imagine the past few years without him. In all likelihood, there would have been no Brexit, no Tory triumph in 2019 and no rallying of the West to defend Ukraine. Downing Street could now be occupied by Jeremy Corbyn and his sinister anti-Semites. Vladimir Putin would not be in retreat. And Britain would still be in thrall to Brussels. Yet despite his famous victories, Boris has been forced first out of office, then out of Parliament ? by his own colleagues. Rather than be damned as a liar by the Privileges Committee, then hounded out of the Commons by weasels who owe their very existence as MPs to him, Boris chose to leave politics with dignity. We should be in no doubt, however, that the nation has lost a transformative political genius whose like we shall not see again. Shakespeare, as usual, put it best. 'Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world like a Colossus, and we petty men walk under his huge legs and peep about to find ourselves dishonourable graves.' It took more than merely the disloyalty of his party to undermine such a tribune of the people, more popular at his zenith than any prime minister since Churchill. The machinations of the mandarins, the relentless sniping of the anti-Brexit media, the revenge of the Remainers: all played a part in this Caesar's assassination. From the moment in late March 2020 when he almost succumbed to Covid, creating a temporary power vacuum, Boris was on the back www.foot.No sooner was he restored to health than the curse of Dominic Cummings and his ill-fated excursion to Barnard Castle gave the PM's enemies their opportunity. From then on, Boris was obliged to devote a large portion of his time to defending himself against a rising tide of trivial accusations, all of which were magnified into major scandals by a hostile Press. This incessant barrage of balderdash diverted the beleaguered Boris from consolidating what should have been his monument: Britain's recovery of its independence from the European Union. Those who profess disappointment in the squandered opportunities of Brexit should at least consider how adverse the conditions inherited by Boris actually were. The mammoth task of making a success of Brexit was made infinitely harder by the pandemic and the restrictions in response, which in turn precipitated both an economic slump and a political crisis. With hindsight ? though some were wiser at the time ? it is clear that the Bank of England printed too much money, which the Treasury spent on overgenerous handouts, while interest rates rose too little and too late. It would, though, be unfair to blame Boris for the cost-of-living crisis. He trusted his Chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the experts in Whitehall to get the balance right. We are all living with the inflationary consequences of their mistakes. The political crisis began sooner than the economic one, in the autumn of 2021. Boris had just lost his mother, Charlotte, a fine painter and a remarkable human being. He relied on her as much as on anyone else alive, as all who witnessed his distress at her funeral will testify. With Covid still a mortal threat, there was no time to mourn his beloved mum. But the bereaved Boris then made some unforced errors. They began with the Owen Paterson affair, when personal loyalty blinded him to the optics of favouring a friend who had broken parliamentary rules. In the end, he not only lost his chum but a by-election and was accused of 'chumocracy', too. Hard on the heels of this setback came the excruciating saga that his foes christened 'Partygate'. Boris can certainly be faulted for the mismanagement of Downing Street during lockdown. As mayor of London, Boris had been surrounded by a small but excellent team, to whom he had delegated the administrative duties he found unpalatable. Downing Street was a much bigger organ of the body politic than City Hall, however, and Boris was not the first incumbent to find it ungovernable. Due to the unprecedented scrutiny that Boris invariably attracted, however, his efforts to maintain morale at No 10 during the grim night watches of the pandemic were reframed by hostile commentators as a national disgrace. A new narrative was fashioned out of gossamer to suggest it had been one rule for the prime minister and another for everyone else. The police investigation of breaches of Covid rules at Downing Street seemed to corroborate this story. Boris himself received just one fixed-penalty notice for an impromptu 'birthday party', at which he had been present for a few minutes but never even had a Without him, there would've been no Brexit He'll tower like a titan in the history books Graphic    Getting away from it all: On a holiday boat trip in Greece with Carrie in 2022We've done it! Carrie and Boris watch the 2019 election results on TV in No 10 Load-Date: June 10, 2023  End of Document
