   Heat pump systems will mean cold houses if fossil fuel boilers are banned Aberdeen Press and Journal August 9, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 26 Length: 1539 words Byline: Struan Nimmo Body   Sir, - I see the Green Party's answer to a dynamic effective politician is MSP Patrick Harvie: Ah well, nothing in the world is perfect. This minister for all the jobs no one else would accept, is only in power simply as Wee Nicola needed to dredge up kowtowing staff to ensure the SNP's bright ideas could be forced through regardless of what was/is best for Scotland. Unfortunately, what she and her cohorts, propped up by the minority Greenies, have managed in nine years has not exactly been successful. The latest mad-cap idea is to force every dwelling in Scotland to compulsorily fit a euphemistically named "heat pump". Now, various facts need to be considered regarding these systems. Heat pump? No: They only achieve around 50C. That makes it a warm pump, at best. Hot water systems normally provide water at 65C for two reasons: to avoid legionella - a lethal bacterium - in the pipework and to be effective as a cleaning medium. Pipes and hot water tanks will need to be used and checked for this bug if 60C-plus water is not regularly run through them. Some obvious problems: The water for domestic use needs to be boosted in temperature by electric immersion heaters. Remember them? They got dumped with the introduction of combi boilers which gave you hot water as and when needed. The pump needs to run night and day as it takes ages to struggle up to this 50C if it goes off, so it has to stay on 24/7. (So the neighbours will be annoyed with a big fan running endlessly.) Good chance the entire existing central heating system will need replaced with clumsy, unsightly, bigger-diameter pipes, as 50C water is not really hot enough for central heating as we know it. Savings? Examples given by the Heat Pump Association: compared to a modern LPG boiler as found in rural Scotland, the savings could be £230 a year but, with a suggested minimum installation cost of £13,000, it will take 56 years to recoup the basic expenses, while someone with a modern oil boiler will be worse off by £135 a year. While there are grants and interest-free loans these are likely to be totally absorbed by the other costs such as insulation, double or triple glazing, etc. Twenty years is being suggested for the lifetime of the pump. However, as the principle is said to be just like a deep freeze working in reverse, which indeed it is, the question is, who has seen a freezer running non-stop for 20 years? If it takes 56 years to cover the costs of the first pump fitted and it only lasts 20 years the sums just don't add up. Interestingly, MSP Harvie has been reported as saying he has a gas boiler and has no intention of changing it. Once again, it's not do as I do, but do as I say. What I suggest is that we will end up sitting in freezing, damp, cold houses where we are no longer allowed to burn carbon fuels while the planet continues to warm up and the politicians still run around in gas-guzzling vehicles, continue to fly to pointless conferences and tell the proletariat what they have to do while the government ignore their own rules. Alastair Armitstead, Achiltibuie. Heating proposals are utter madness Sir, - Is there no beginning to Patrick Harvie's talents? Everything he and Lorna Slater touch turns to green dust. His latest proposal is to force homeowners in Scotland to get rid of their gas boilers and install mega-expensive, inefficient, heat pumps while those south of the border can install replacement gas boilers until 2035 - although this date is certain to be extended. Replacement gas boiler, £3,000. Heat pump, £8,000 to £35,000. The Scottish Government must stop this proposal and get rid of Harvie and Slater immediately. If they do not get rid of them there will be a public backlash that will make the French Revolution look like the Mad Hatter's tea party. Now, where did I put my guillotine? Clark Cross, Linlithgow. Rural life feels like living in a playpark Sir, - Why do people move to a quiet tranquil area in the countryside and then try to change it to be more like the area that they have just moved from? Why is it when the TV experts' prophecies of doom are predicting soaring temperatures and more wildfires and a prominent labour MP states on TV that the world is burning, why are the Green/SNP Scottish Government cutting the number of firefighters in Scotland? Why, if the sea is rising, are we building piers at the same height as previous piers? Why, if we require using every conservable piece of land in the Highlands and islands to produce and carry electricity to our capital, does Patrick Harvie and the Greens not allow wind turbines to be erected on Arthur's Seat and maybe a substation on the esplanade? If it's good enough for us in the country, it's good enough for the people of Edinburgh (it's called levelling up). Why, when we are being urged to plant trees to save the planet, are we cutting down forests to allow the erection of wind farms and infrastructure? What is the government's vision of the countryside? Is it a playpark for people from towns to walk in and ride mountain bikes at great speed, creating grotesque roads through forests and mountains and spoiling nature's wonderland? Is it a place for townspeople to clog up roads with camper vans whose wheels may be on their side of the road but their very large wing mirrors are on my side? Is it a place where all people can demand the right to roam and cycle through a working, living, environment and where, by law, we can't pass them walking or cycling on our narrow roads even when on the opposite side of the road? Should it not be classed as a working environment that provides townspeople with clean air, fresh water and food, power to light and heat their homes and a place to relax and enjoy unspoiled scenery (before the erection of wind farms and pylons all over the Highlands and islands, of course) Why, when visiting historic sites in Scotland and being guided is it rare to hear a local accent, let alone a Scottish accent? Due to global warming, the seasons are changing and it must be confusing. So much so, that a subscription TV and film provider now shows Christmas films three times a year: are they hoping to get one of them in the right season? Jim Leitch, Orkney. A fine mess we've got ourselves in Sir, - "Brexit is never done" rears again. A front-page headline in the FT was "UK government climbs down on post-Brexit product mark", rather than a new "costly red tape Brexit UKCA" safety mark. It was the latest in a never-ending series confirming that Brexit was economically bad for the UK. Brexit so far fails UK farmers, fish workers and many manufacturers. Is this CE concession the start of "Brexit repair"? Who politically makes the repair, and how, is crucial to our economic outcome. Political parties are wholly polarised, even internally. The UK desperately needs collaborative apolitical purpose strategies, via proportional representation, after recent years of constitutional undermining and anti-democratic government action. Radical change is needed. But I cannot see politically from where this may come; so I must choose and perhaps influence others. Perhaps the "known Mr Miseries on Indy" in P&J letters can help me. UK finances, compared to G7, are in a poor state. Rather than say where I should not vote, be positive Mr Gradgrind and say where to place my vote and how it will retrieve our economy. Mike Hannan. Cults. Stance changes with the bunnet Sir, - My MSP, Richard Lochhead, has expressed "serious concerns" about the new UK alcohol duty levies, stating: "I've been strongly opposed to the Tories' plans to hike duty on Scotch whisky". He goes on to accuse the Tories of betraying this vital industry and how these duty changes will risk future investment on Speyside. Ironically, on the day of their implementation, Diageo reported a 5.1 % increase in operating profits to £4.6 billion. Could this possibly be the same Richard Lochhead who voted for minimum alcohol pricing? The same MSP who has uttered not a single "concern" against his SNP-Green government's plans to ban all whisky distillers from sponsoring sporting events, advertising their products or selling branded goods? Every whisky trail, distillery and visitor centre sign would have fallen foul to this proposed lunacy which, thankfully, was added to his new bosses' growing list of U-turns and kicked into the long grass. Distillery visitor centres and shops bring vital full-time, part-time and seasonal employment to rural communities, where jobs are thin on the ground. These are the jobs any decent local MSP would be fighting to keep. Scotland exports the equivalent of 53 bottles of Scotch per second and every drop of that £6bn earner leaves our shores duty-free. One would hope that Mr Lochhead is aware that UK duty has no bearing whatsoever on exported whisky revenues. His rage thus is faux. Some of those "serious concerns" directed at the broken SNP promises - on the A96, the A9 and the rest of a long list of failures - would be more representative of his constituents' priorities. The MSP for Moray appears to want to down his dram and take away his driver's pack. He supports increased alcohol prices, wearing his SNP-Green hat, but opposes them when wearing his "criticise anything Tory" bunnet. J Lawrence, Elgin. Load-Date: August 16, 2023  End of Document
