   Hero or villain: how will history judge Johnson? i-news June 17, 2023 SC1 Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 1782 words Byline: Serina Sandhu Body   Many words come to mind when thinking of Boris Johnson, Brexit, "Partygate", vaccines and Ukraine among them. But with the passage of time, the historical view of the former prime minister - brought into disrepute following a damning Privileges Committee report that found he deliberately misled Parliament with denials over Partygate - may be very different from today's. Some say that, ultimately, it is the success or failure of Brexit that will be most influential in shaping his legacy. Here, historians and political experts tell i how they think history will judge him: One of the most unruly PMs in British history "Boris Johnson will go down as one of the most chaotic and unruly prime ministers in British history. "He had significant historic opportunities in Brexit, the Covid epidemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine to leave his mark on history. But his failure to capitalise on the first and find a way through the Northern Ireland Protocol, his indifferent and shambolic oversight of the second and his inconclusive conduct of the third means he squandered the opportunities that he had - as he did the other opportunities provided by the landslide of 80 in December 2019. Never in modern British history has a prime minister squandered such a landslide so quickly. "His repeated errors of judgement since he stood down, and his blaming of others, are only diminishing his standing. Never has a prime minister in modern history behaved with such little regard for convention or appropriate standards and norms of conduct." Sir Anthony Seldon, head of Epsom College and biographer of many prime ministers Immortality but not glory "I believe that people will view Boris Johnson as a politician who consciously tried to cast himself in the mould of many of the politicians of antiquity. He famously kept a bust of [Greek politician] Pericles on his desk. "Some may say that he was motivated to a degree by the same desire for an immortal reputation - known to the Greeks as 'kleos' - that propelled the likes of [Trojan War hero] Achilles. Boris Johnson might well have achieved immortality but not glory." Daisy Dunn, classicist and author Audacious leader in touch with working class "I think he is in the tradition of Benjamin Disraeli. He's a Tory democrat which means patriotism plus measures to improve the life of the working class plus making fun of the middle class prigs. Disraeli made fun of William Gladstone, Boris Johnson is making fun of the Privileges Committee, ridiculing it. I think history will decide he belongs in that tradition. "Tory democrats do often blow themselves up. Johnson has blown himself up. "Some people will always think he's a scoundrel and some people to this day think Disraeli a scoundrel. Other people will think he's a great Conservative who makes them feel good about being Conservative and who carries the war to the liberal intelligentsia who think that they are guardians of the working class. "Johnson showed during the Brexit referendum, where he evidently had a decisive impact, and he showed in the 2019 election, that he was more in touch with workingclass voters who felt they had been taken for granted by Labour and the Conservatives for at least 50 years. He reached them in a way that his opponents couldn't. "There will be moralists who think he is an intolerable figure, but there will be people who find him a life-enhancing politician with a quality of audacity." Andrew Gimson, author of 'Boris Johnson: The Rise and Fall of a Troublemaker at Number 10' Brash and bullish with a chaotic approach "There are reasons for Boris Johnson's time as prime minister to be remembered as both consequential and controversial. His distinct style, both brash and bullish, was a large factor in the 80-seat majority he won at the 2019 election, the global leadership he showed during the start of the Ukraine invasion and the rapid pace of the UK's vaccine rollout during the pandemic. "But the impact of his chaotic approach to government on our constitution, our public institutions, Parliament and his own party may be his greatest legacy. Johnson was a very different prime minister to the men and women that came before him, and his time in No 10 could well come to serve as a stark reminder of the need for effective and ordered government." Dr Catherine Haddon, historian and programme director at the Institute for Government Neither 100% hero or 100% villain "Boris Johnson is blamed a lot for breaking the rules, breaking constitutional conventions. I think David Lloyd George was too, after 1922, but in the perspective of history, people look at other things. They look at his record in constructing the welfare state and winning the First World War. Boris Johnson's achievements are nowhere near that scale, but there are some achievements which are sometimes forgotten. "He did break the parliamentary deadlock on Brexit and he got Brexit through. "He led the country well on the Ukraine war and he's regarded as a hero in Ukraine." "And thirdly, something that's not often noticed, what he did for diversity in the leadership of the Conservative Party. Most of the candidates for Tory leadership after him were either women or from ethnic minorities. Three out of the top four posts in Liz Truss's government and this one are from ethnic minorities, who are obviously wonderful role models. A friend in France rang me and said he was astonished; it would never happen in France. And Angela Merkel's last cabinet in 2017 - some of us think Germany is more liberal than Britain - was 100 per cent white. "I think these are three achievements. I think also the Levelling Up White Paper, which is a very good document, is another. May I argue it's more due to Michael Gove but it nevertheless took place under Johnson's government. It's a serious attempt to end regional inequalities. "As with all former prime ministers, much will depend on Boris Johnson's memoir. I think his best course would be for him to honestly admit that he made mistakes but to say that they pale in light of other achievements. "The problem is that Boris Johnson is a man who incites very strong feeling both for and against. Those who are for him can't see anything wrong. Those hostile to him can't see anything to be said in his favour. I think both sides are wrong, and we need a qualified judgment. He's neither 100 per cent hero or 100 per cent villain." Sir Vernon Bogdanor, professor of government at King's College London and author of 'Beyond Brexit: Towards a British Constitution' Johnson is not Churchill "There have been a lot of parallels drawn between Boris Johnson and Winston Churchill but there are also huge gaps between them. Churchill had vast experience of high office by the time he reached Downing Street - he had been chancellor, home secretary, First Lord of the Admiralty, to name but a few. The same cannot be said for Johnson. "Churchill had his period in the wilderness but that was the basis of his comeback during the Second World War. He was the one who had consistently warned of the threat posed by Nazi Germany. I don't really see how Johnson has the policy or intellectual basis for a comeback of that nature. "Nonetheless, they did have certain things in common. Both have this tremendous gift for language and communication. They both have a knack for a turn of phrase that engages people. And while they also didn't enjoy great followings within the parliamentary Tory party, they had a great following among the membership and activists." Leo McKinstry, journalist, historian and author of 'Attlee and Churchill: Allies in War, Adversaries in Peace' Johnson will be a dire warning "Boris Johnson won't be merely a footnote in the future histories of this country, he'll be a dire warning - an object lesson of what happens to a political party and a country when, out of desperation, it decides to make a complete charlatan and a visionless populist its leader. He proved himself utterly unfit to be prime minister, he cheapened our politics, and he poisoned our democracy. "Whether his helping to 'get Brexit done' will make up for any of that in the eyes of posterity will, I suspect, ultimately depend on whether the UK's departure from the EU will come in time to be seen as a success or a failure. Sadly, for the country as well as Johnson's own reputation, it's looking a hell of a lot more like a mistake than a masterstroke." Tim Bale, professor of politics at Queen Mary, University of London, and author of 'The Conservative Party from Thatcher to Cameron' He will be forgotten "Boris Johnson does like to make himself out to be like Pericles, who was the big statesman of 5th century Athens. "But Pericles was a very flawed figure and I think that the comparison is rather neat in some ways. Johnson tends to think of Pericles in quite simple, grandiose terms but he doesn't quite get that Pericles is a very difficult character. By making that comparison, to somebody like me, it's just pointing at the flaws. "My personal opinion is that we will forget him because I don't see any substance there. It seems to me that it's all just shadows and shifting. He's not Pericles, he's not Winston Churchill. He thinks that he is. He is lacking truthfulness and integrity. He's just playing a game." Lynette Mitchell, professor in Greek history and politics at the University of Exeter Better not to have a legacy "Ideally Boris Johnson will not be remembered at all. "Having lived through him and the chaos he has released in recent years, and the people who lost loved ones during Covid, it's impossible to do anything but think about him. Generally, my response to people who exhibit quite such toxic behaviour is to think about them as little as possible because I think there couldn't be much that annoys them more and that seems to be in the spirit of the age to me. "I don't think it will be a glorious legacy by almost any estimation. It's really hard to see how. I don't think it's particularly outré to suggest it would be better not to have a legacy." Natalie Haynes, author, broadcaster and classicist Endagering UK democracy "On his record to date - both as PM and as defenestrated PM - he must be judged very harshly and negatively indeed: not alone for his personal immoralities but also and more for his diminishing of, and indeed endangering of, the future of our curious and fragile UK parliamentary democracy which, however imperfect, is so greatly superior to other forms of political regime that have been and are being tried. "An anathema on Mr Johnson - as a one-time classicist, he will understand the meaning of 'anathema'." Paul Cartledge, A.G. Leventis Professor of Greek Culture emeritus, University of Cambridge Load-Date: June 16, 2023  End of Document
