   Home news in brief The Independent - Daily Edition August 23, 2023 Wednesday First Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Print Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 15 Length: 928 words Body   Brexit red tape sees work for UK musicians dry up in EU The devastating impact of Brexit on Britain's touring musicians has been revealed in a major survey of the struggling sector - with some performers forced to quit their profession. Almost half of UK musicians (47 per cent) say they have had less work in Europe since the country's exit from the bloc, while more than a quarter (28 per cent) have had no work in the EU at all. The new report by the Independent Society of Musicians (ISM) warned that the red tape enforced by Boris Johnson's Brexit deal was still having "an enormously damaging" effect on British bands and singers. The survey of 400 musicians for the ISM report found that one in four (40 per cent) have had EU work cancelled since Brexit because of problems with visas and work permits, extra travel costs and carnets - the paperwork needed for instruments and equipment. "UK music is a great success story and we are rightly proud of it," said ISM chief executive Deborah Annetts. "The government has been asleep on the job - it could have tackled many of the issues facing the music sector by itself and made Brexit work. It chose not to." Four arrested after delivery driver killed in attack Four people have been arrested on suspicion of murder after a 23-year-old DPD delivery driver was killed during a "terrifying" attack in Shropshire. The victim was out making deliveries in Shrewsbury at lunchtime on Monday when the fatal incident occurred. Two men aged 22 and 26, and two aged 24, have been arrested on suspicion of murder and remain in police custody, West Mercia Police said. A spokesperson for the logistics company said a two-person crew was involved in the incident on Berwick Avenue adding "that sadly one of the two individuals delivering parcels was attacked and subsequently died". One local resident told The Mirror: "It's a terrifying thing to happen around here. The poor lad was attacked while just doing his job, nobody deserves that. I was shaking all day yesterday, you just can't believe it." Man killed by Tube train after police chase A man has died after being hit by a Tube train following a police chase in west London. The individual, who has not been named, was seen close to the tracks near the East Acton underground station before being hit by the passing train. Officers had been pursuing him on foot after a vehicle on Du Cane Road near Shepherds Bush crashed into a car. Several other people had been in the car, while the vehicle driver was taken to the hospital by police. The railway lines were searched by police on Monday night, witnesses said. Detectives are still working to establish the victim's identity and tell his family, while the Metropolitan Police has said its directorate of professional standards has been informed and an investigation into the man's death is underway. PA Scotland 'turning tide on drug deaths' The minister in charge of Scotland's drug policy has said the tide is turning as new figures revealed the country's largest-ever fall in deaths. Data from the National Records of Scotland (NRS) showed there were a total of 1,051 deaths due to drug misuse in 2022 - a drop of 279 from the previous year. It is the second year in a row that drug deaths have fallen - although the total for 2021 dropped by just nine from the record high seen in 2020, when 1,339 people died. The data also showed the rate of "drug poisoning deaths" in Scotland in 2021 - the most recent year for which comparisons are available -was 2.7 times higher than average for the UK. Drugs and alcohol policy minister Elena Whitham said the decline shows policies like expanding residential rehabilitation were making "significant progress". However, while the number of deaths linked to drugs misuse is now at the lowest it has been since 2017, the NRS report made clear that the rate of deaths is still "much higher" than it was when recording the data began in 1996. It found that "after adjusting for age, there were 3.7 times as many drug misuse deaths in 2022 as in 2000". PA £6m rewilding fund to help threatened species Pine martens, water voles, European eels and spiny lobsters are among the UK's threatened species The Wildlife Trusts are aiming to help with a new £6m rewilding fund, the charity has said. The rewilding programme, called Transforming Nature's Recovery, is to help the UK fulfil its international obligation of protecting 30 per cent of land for nature by 2030 and net zero carbon emissions by 2050. It will take £56bn to realise this aim, The Wildlife Trusts said, as it announced £6m in funding from the Ecological Restoration Fund, which supports organisations worldwide that revive nature and protect biodiverse areas. Beyond funding the release of beavers and grazing animals, the money will also go towards regenerating marine ecosystems off the Welsh coast, a nature recovery corridor along the length of Hadrian's Wall and improving chalk streams, peatland and grasslands across the country. Dr Rob Stoneman, director of landscape recovery at The Wildlife Trusts, said: "Extinctions, pollution and wildfires make headlines with increasing frequency and so it's vital to go much further with nature recovery across the UK. We must create a place where wildlife, farming and people thrive together, where beavers work their magic and benefit communities, where seas are abundant with marine wildlife and where there's easy access to nature to improve people's lives. This game-changing donation from the Ecological Restoration Fund will bolster our work when nature needs us most." PA Load-Date: August 22, 2023  End of Document
