   Humza can go on all the marches he likes. He is on the road to nowhere Scottish Daily Mail September 4, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14 Length: 964 words Byline: STEPHEN DAISLEY Body   HOW did you spend your Saturday? Playing trolley dodgems down the local supermarket then taking out a second mortgage to pay for a tub of margarine? Traipsing around a flatpack furniture shop wondering when shelves stopped being 'shelves' and became 'storage solutions' from a range named after an obscure fishing village in Sweden? Whiling away the hours in your garden hacking at weeds like Percy Fawcett making his way through the Amazon jungle? These and their variations are how most people pass their weekends. Mundane, perhaps, but all part of the necessary tasks and rituals of life. That is unless you are Humza Yousaf, who spent his Saturday on a pro-independence march from Edinburgh Castle to the Scottish parliament. This was something of a curiosity. For one, Yousaf is the First Minister of the administration that controls the Scottish parliament. For another, the Scottish parliament has no power over independence, so he was not only marching on his own government but marching on the wrong one. Values The demonstration was organised by an outfit calling itself Believe in Scotland, and the First Minister is nothing if not a believer. There is barely an issue on which we are not familiar with his 'values', whether it's independence, climate change, gender reform or the rest. Values are a fine thing but politics is supposed to be about doing things, not just telling us what you think about them. If a politician says belief in the NHS is central to his values but he presides over a health service of lengthy waiting times, unfilled nursing posts and missed clinical targets, you might question whether his values mean all that much. A hypothetical example, you www.understand.No doubt an independent Scotland underpins the First Minister's values, but supporters of independence are entitled to ask how much good that has done them - under Yousaf or his predecessor. The First Minister had a message when he addressed the crowd on Saturday, only it wasn't his message. It was Nicola Sturgeon's message and it was a familiar one. Hello Brexit, my old friend; I've come to talk with you again. Yousaf called Brexit a 'national tragedy' and proposed independence as the way to repair the 'damages' done. The UK's decision to withdraw from the EU has cast a long shadow. When Leave won the referendum, and won narrowly, it was a seismic event that ruptured the tectonic plates of UK politics. It was a cleave in a culture war that divided the nation by age, education level, cultural attitudes and geography. If you were a Millennial or a younger Gen-Xer, a graduate, socially progressive or lived in a city or university town, you were the modal Remainer. If you were a boomer, held no degree, were traditional in your outlook, and lived in a provincial suburb or the countryside, you were the very soul of a Brexiteer. The truth is much more complicated but that hasn't stopped sundry chancers peddling the notion of a country irrecoverably divided. Among those chancers were Nicola Sturgeon's SNP, which hadn't taken much interest in the referendum itself but became very animated about the result. Scotland had voted 62 per cent for Remain, meaning it would be 'dragged out of the EU against its will'. A few points, for what they're worth. The EU referendum, unlike the referendum on independence, was a UK-wide vote. Scotland expressed no more will than did London (which voted Remain) or Yorkshire (which voted Leave). Scotland was never a member of the EU. It was inside the bloc by virtue of being part of the UK. Had the SNP won the 2014 referendum, Scotland would have seceded from the UK and would lie outside the EU. The Sturgeon-era SNP glided effortlessly from treating removal from the EU, temporarily or otherwise, as a price worth paying for independence to declaring Westminster's withdrawal from the same body a cornerstone reason for independence. It is damning of Scotland's political discourse, and the level of scrutiny involved, that the SNP's position on Brexit is treated remotely seriously. Its position is that withdrawing from one union after 47 years has proved such a disaster that Scotland should withdraw from another union after 316 years. If you feel burned by Brexit, independence would be scorched earth. The Yousaf era is serving up much of the same as the Sturgeon era, though I don't know if the man merits his own era. He is little more than a continuation of the old regime, which was forced to rebrand and change personnel after some high-profile- difficulties. Awakened You might wonder how Saturday's march is meant to take the independence cause forward. The answer is that it's not. Yousaf remains wedded to the Sturgeon strategy; he was by her side and backed her every call, all the way to the Supreme Court, where the independence dream was rudely awakened by the forbidding black and white of the Scotland Act. Yousaf represents more of the same, but more of nothing is still nothing. His appearance on Saturday was another well-thumbed page from the Sturgeon playbook, cynically exploiting the hopes of the party faithful while aware that neither he nor his government has a plan to overcome the legislative roadblock that is the Scotland Act. He jabs his finger in the Brexit wound because he hopes that keeping this lesion open will prompt previously averse voters to back independence. But we've already seen that happen and still it has brought a second referendum no closer. The First Minister has his values but not the faintest clue how to turn them into political action. Like Sturgeon before him, Yousaf is the ideal leader for an independence party that isn't in any hurry to achieve independence. He can go on all the marches he likes. He's leading independence supporters on the road to nowhere. Stephen.Daisley@dailymail.co.uk Load-Date: September 4, 2023  End of Document
