   Ian McConnell: Scottish tonic welcome after enduring discredited Tory dogma Herald Scotland August 14, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 914 words Byline: Ian McConnell Body   There was definitely a need for some sort of tonic after having to endure the recent utterances of Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and Chancellor Jeremy Hunt on UK inflation and interest rates. These musings were not only worrying but thoroughly unimaginative, as you might perhaps expect given that they came straight from the Tories- familiar economic playbook. This book is surely packed with failed policies, but that does not stop them being repeated. Given how much there is to lament on the UK economic front, it is all the more important to celebrate the good news when it comes along. READ MORE: Ian McConnell: In grip of UK misery, Scotland-s detractors need to stop growling And, in a Scottish context, new research published last week by accountancy firm KPMG and the University of Nottingham provided that much-needed tonic. This shows that around 37% of local areas in Scotland have been identified as -highly investable-, a much greater proportion than the 22% figure across Great Britain. The KPMG and University of Nottingham survey, which uses artificial intelligence technologies to pinpoint what is influencing economic activity across the UK-s regions and devolved nations, reveals that Scotland-s central belt is experiencing above-average levels of research and innovation and business investment compared with Great Britain as a whole. The study meanwhile flags high levels of investment across the Highlands. Not only that but Edinburgh and Glasgow are among areas of Great Britain showing the highest rates of growth in research and development spending and venture capital investment. Scotland meanwhile also fares relatively well in terms of new business creation, according to the survey. The findings surely constitute a fillip in the most difficult of economic times in the UK, as high inflation and the surge in interest rates understandably continue to dominate the headlines. Other recent good news for Scotland included separate surveys in June, one from accountancy firm EY and the other from foreign direct investment and trade promotion agency Scottish Development International, showing the nation-s inward investment performance has remained strong indeed in a UK context. The series of good news around Scotland-s economy was highlighted in my column in The Herald on Friday. READ MORE: Denial after denial from brass-necked Tory arch-Brexiter There will, of course, be plenty of ups and downs along what is a perilous road. And Scotland faces much the same dismal macroeconomic backdrop as the rest of post-Brexit Britain. READ MORE: Ian McConnell: Bizarre, bloody-minded logic in Brexit Britain Much difficulty has been visited upon the UK by the Conservatives- failed but continuing austerity programme as well as their hard Brexit. And it can sometimes feel the economic gloom arising from this grave mismanagement, and some global forces, is all-encompassing. The ruling Conservatives appear to have nothing to say, or deliver, to cheer up the lives of ordinary people. What we get is Tory mantras, spouted in condescending tones. Mr Sunak-s appeal earlier this month on Twitter for people to watch his explanatory video on inflation - and the recording itself - were truly toe-curling. He introduced his video segment with the following tweet: -I know a lot of people are worried about rising interest rates. But the alternative would make inflation far worse, so what you buy becomes more expensive & what you save, worth less. Take a moment to watch this video about why decisive action is needed to control inflation.- The video, obviously, set forth the Tory view on inflation. It included the following: -The independent Bank of England are controlling inflation by raising interest rates. We know this is causing borrowers distress and anxiety but the alternative is far worse. Without decisive action to control inflation, prices will stay high for longer and rates will be higher in the long run.- Prices are going to stay high, Mr Sunak. And it is crucial the Conservatives do not in any way muddy the reality that what the Prime Minister is targeting with his pledge to halve inflation this year, to a level still above 5% it is worth noting, would absolutely not mean prices were falling. Prices would still be rising at a stomach-churning rate - it is just that the pace of increase would be a bit less extreme than that which households the length and breadth of the UK have been having to endure. There remain questions, of course, over whether the Bank of England is doing the right thing on interest rates. Former Monetary Policy Committee member Danny Blanchflower, Bruce V. Rauner -78 professor of economics at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire in the US and a visiting professor at the University of Glasgow, wrote in The Herald in June: -Sadly, these rate rises [by the Bank of England] have hardly had any impact at all on inflation - which was caused by supply chain issues after the pandemic, the Ukraine war and Brexit. Brexit and its devastating impact on supply chains, especially for food, is what sets the UK apart from every other country. This can't be fixed by rate rises.- This argument continues to look compelling. In the meantime, however, households and businesses will continue to have to deal with much higher borrowing costs. Mr Sunak and Mr Hunt seem quite content about this, but they should be worrying far more about the detrimental impact on growth and living standards. Recent history would suggest they will not care one whit. Load-Date: August 14, 2023  End of Document
