   If you pin our woes on Brexit, then explain Sweden; To blame dogged ination on leaving the EU lets the Bank othe hook and ignores deeper weaknesses The Daily Telegraph (London) July 19, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 23 Length: 1146 words Byline: AMBROSE EVANS-PRITCHARD Body   In ation is stuck at 9.3pc. The currency is in freefall. The economy has been in stagation for ve quarters. Household debt exploded to an all-time high of 98pc of GDP in the madness of the Covid credit boom. The property bubble has since burst. House prices have fallen by 16pc. The central bank is raising interest rates into the teeth of the storm but markets suspect that rate-setters - succumbing to "mortgage dominance" - are holding back because they dare not inict more pain on debtors. Such is the messy state of aairs of Sweden. It is a formidable AAA country with deep economic strengths, well-positioned to reap the immense gains of clean-tech. It is going through one of its boom-bust cycles, akin to the banking crisis of the early 1990s. It will bounce back. I bring up Sweden's woes only to counter the fallacy of post hoc, ergo propter hoc, or what economists call Granger Causality. The fact that A happened after B does not mean that A caused B. Blaming everything on Brexit, including Britain's ination mess, is intellectually sloppy. What do Sweden and the UK have in common? They both have the property disease and easy access to credit in good times, which amplies cycles. They also have a central bank that hosed petrol on there just as pandemic ination was taking o "We are now where we are because the Riksbank pursued the strange policy of negative interest rates in the middle of a boom," said Swedish journalist Andreas Cervenka. He is calling for a truth commission. The Riksbank and the Bank of England both fanned the ames by launching a second round of pandemic QE in late 2020, adding stimulus as house prices went mad. Threadneedle Street did so even though the broad money supply was picking up, which was not the case after the Lehman crisis when QE was needed to avert a collapse in money. Outgoing rate-setter Silvana Tenreyro argued in a speech this April that QE is just a bond maturity swap and works only by inuencing interest rates. "There is no separate 'money' channel that can unleash ination," she said. From this unscientic premise, she argues that Covid QE2 was a liquidity insurance policy against "market dysfunction", but that since this dysfunction never happened the bond purchases had almost no www.eect.No e ect! One does not have to accept the quantity theory of money but one cannot credibly pretend that this exalted tradition does not exist. The evidence for a "money" channel is overwhelming, which is why the European Central Bank was established with a dual pillar system that tracks M3 money (before the ECB fell to the lira bloc). When a central bank buys bonds from non-banks, it has a potent eect on broad money, shaping prices 18-24 months later. If the Bank of England thinks there is no "money" channel - and deputygovernor Ben Broadbent seems to share this view - we have a serious lapse at the heart of our economic institutions. It also means that the Bank will be blind to the danger today as the money supply goes into accelerating contraction. Reason Two for Britain's outlier ination is reliance on natural gas, a legacy of the North Sea boom. The 13-fold rise in gas prices during Vladimir Putin's energy war exposed Britain's Achilles' Heel. The Netherlands has the same reliance and had an even higher ination rate last autumn, peaking at 17.1pc on the Eurostat measure. That destabilised price and wage contracts, just as it has done in the UK, and is why Dutch pay settlements are rising at a modern era high of 8.2pc according to data from the AWVN consultancy. Dutch in ation fell to 6.4pc in June, which suggests a better pass-through to consumers than the drag from the UK's energy price cap. Other high-gas states in Europe also have stubborn ination: Czechia 12.5pc, Austria 7.8pc, Germany 6.8pc, and Italy 6.7pc. Gas reliance is becoming a deadweight for the UK economy. Imported energy is the biggest element in the trade decit and leaves the country exposed to destructive swings in energy prices. The Oce for Budget Responsibility argues that gas addiction is a "scal risk" with "wide reaching implications for the UK economy and public nances". I would go further. If Britain clings to gas, it will pay a mounting economic penalty, undercut by cheaper renewables and the learning S-curve of clean technology. It will become a backwater as China runs away with the energy revolution. It will also throw away its own success story as a clean-tech leader. Reason Three for higher ination is that Britain, like Holland, did not fully suppress price signals during Putin's energy war. France froze electricity and gas prices with its bouclier tarifaire. This deed the International Monetary Fund, which said the policy discouraged energy saving. However, it did stop ination setting o an incipient price-wage spiral. It worked for France. If Brexit caused a jump in prices - and I think it did - that eect was: a) after the initial devaluation in 2016; and b) in the months after the end of the transition when companies were struggling to adjust. The latter is hard to measure because Covid overwhelmed everything. The post-transition shock was mostly a one-ohit. The e ect is working slightly in the opposite direction by now. Firms are learning how to manage the new system. Flanders has simplied customs procedures at Zeebrugge and Antwerp, and rolled out the red carpet for UK rms. This forces other ports to raise their game. I struggle to see how Brexit trade barriers are causing an inationary process at this juncture. Which leaves immigration, and the imputed productivity losses from migration barriers in most anti-Brexit modelling. This argument is, by now, shopworn. Prof Jonathan Portes from King's College, London (no Brexiteer) says Britain has one of the most liberal regimes for legal immigration in the world. Net inows have doubled to 606,000 and many reach the work force one way or another. Payroll employment has hit a record 30m and is back on its pre-2016 trajectory. Are there pockets of labour shortages? Of course, but there are shortages in Europe, too. Is the visa regime for specialised workers slow, costly, and bad for the economy? Absolutely. But that does not explain the contours of British ination over the past year. Powerful global forces are going to pull down ination over the next few months. China is in deation. Headline in ation in the United States has fallen to 3pc. Producer price ination is negative in the eurozone. Global dollar liquidity is contracting. This exogenous e ect will accelerate the process within the UK as lower energy, food, and input costs pass through with a lag. By then, we will start to feel the delayed effects of 13 rate rises and aggressive quantitative tightening. If Britain is still worried about ination this time next year, I'll eat my hat. 'Imported energy is the biggest element in the trade decit and leaves us open to price swings' Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
