   Insider view of loyalists in CRISIS; Historian Aaron Edwards explores what unionism means now… and how it can heal Mail on Sunday (London) July 9, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 44,45 Length: 2053 words Byline: Aaron Edwards Body   In his new book A People Under Siege, historian Aaron Edwards dives deep into the 'profound challenges' facing the North's unionist community from partition until today. In its analysis of the beliefs and mindset of unionists since Brexit, the book lays bare how a referendum that 'began on the question of sovereignty quickly degenerated into cries of betrayal over a redrawn border in the Irish Sea'. This has made unionists more insular 'resurrecting ethnic and nationalist notions of what constitutes the Union'. This extract from the book's epilogue is particularly timely as the North's Twelfth of July celebrations begin. 12 July 2021 Ballymoney, North Antrim, I'm back home again for the Twelfth, 20 years after my grandfather's lodge was refused permission to walk down its traditional route. This time a coronavirus pandemic has intervened to impose a whole new set of restrictions on Orange Order parades. On my early morning run around Ballyduff and Monkstown I'm greeted by the acrid smell of the Eleventh Night bonfires. They've become a much grander feature in working-class unionist housing estates than they were in 2001. Burnt tyres and thousands of pallets make me dry heave as the smell seeps into my pores. I return home to a morning of online teaching, to be greeted by students eager to hear about the state of the world and the effects of mega-trends like globalisation, pandemics, climate change, the rise of China and resurgence of Russia, ahead of the tribal rituals practised in a place the British Army has long since consigned to nostalgia-filled memories of 'Op Banner'. Peace has come to Northern Ireland in the years since Britain's massive security cordon sanitaire was lifted and troops ordered back to barracks, even if the news headlines occasionally make mention of the violence visited on marginalised communities like those I know only too well. A few hours after it died out, the Ballyduff bonfire still smoulders in the distance, burning beneath the ash and metal rims of the odd car wheel, the last of the gigantic pallet fortress set alight less than 24 hours earlier. I am reminded of how loyalist culture now appears mesmerised by the ritual act of burning what it creates - it's a perfect metaphor for the wrecking of working-class areas and the burning of cars and a bus that proceeded the beginning of the Protestant marching season in 2021. Later that afternoon I make my way to Mossley West train station for an onward journey to meet some north Antrim loyalists in Ballymoney. Orange Standards, loyalist paramilitary flags and new Northern Ireland centenary flags line my route as I make my way through one working-class estate after another. My train journey is much less eventful. I half expect a throng of people making their way to and from the parades at Ballymoney as the train pulls into the station, but there are few people about - only a few stragglers as I make my way up the main street to the old hotel where I have arranged to meet the loyalists. As I get closer, I spot a senior DUP figure coming out and walking down the street. I make my way around the back, where a couple of bouncers stop me and ask me for a fiver to gain entry to the function room where my contacts are waiting. The loyalists I'm here to see inform me that the DUP politician called in to discuss the Northern Ireland Protocol. It seems that the DUP is working hard to keep its supporters on board with their strategy, though it's clear to me that their patience is wearing thin. We're joined by a young Conservative Party social media campaigner who has come over to cover the Twelfth and report back to the Tory grassroots about the feelings of betrayal and disgruntlement with the party's leadership around Brexit. He's finding the emotional bouts of everyday patriotism overwhelming - as I know from my own years living in middle England, this populist dreamtime is how Tories imagine the entire UK once was. I'm reminded of George Orwell's observation about patriotism in The Lion And The Unicorn, which he saw, in England at any rate, as 'boasting and flag-wagging, the "Rule Britannia" stuff', 'done by small minorities'. For ordinary people, patriotism was never 'vocal or even conscious'. In Ulster loyalism it is often the opposite. It can be loud and overbearing, rough and ready, complete with tawdry flags and chest beating. In paramilitary circles it is even rougher, with respect for virility, black humour and an unhealthy appetite for the martial spirit trumping light conversation. I am troubled by the hijacking of patriotism by Conservatives, though I am comforted by Orwell's other observation that patriotism has 'nothing to do with Conservativism. It is actually the opposite of Conservativism, since it is a devotion to something that is always changing and yet it is felt to be mystically the same'. The more I have travelled the world, the more I have become increasingly internationalist, which the late, great Christopher Hitchens observed is 'the highest form of patriotism'. I became an advocate for change and making the world a better place not through some kind of idealism, but by the example I was set by role models like Mark Langhammer, Bill McClinton and Dougie Jamison from the Rathcoole Self Help Group, who offered an alternative to a tribal-based view of the world, as well as visiting places less fortunate and more troubled than where I grew up. Here in Ballymoney, it's heading towards the afternoon and a ramping-up of loyalist festivities as people enjoy the craic while taking the p*** out of each other. Oddly, I'm surrounded by an eclectic mix of people of all backgrounds, both male and female, young and old. It's predominantly white and poor, but there are a few who defy this stereotype. They are all welcomed at the table. There are no boundaries in this imagined community, except between those loyal to the UK and those who are not, none of whom appear to be in attendance. This is the closest thing to a holy day for loyalists. Iknow that there is good in the people around me here in this heartland of loyalty. They want the same things as we all do. I have learned that even though we might disagree on how to politically achieve these things, it does not have to make us opponents. Too often I have seen loyalism self-destruct because of a clash of personalities or the cynically held view that one person - the 'man in the big picture' - has all the answers. Some of the biggest bluffers and chancers have come from the ranks of loyalist paramilitarism, and even more from the small crew of acolytes who flock to them. They have a selfish view of human nature and of their own interests. Few of them are as welcoming as the loyalists in front of me now, most of whom seem self-aware and conscious of their own limitations. Several of them tell me of another encounter with a senior member of the DUP who privately told them they 'have at best 15 years before they ended up like Hong Kong', presumably in a transitional handover of power by London to Dublin. Brexit has given rise to an intense echo chamber of calls for a 'united Ireland' or a 'new Ireland'. The champions of this fundamentally utopian future typically give little thought to winning over unionists who have no time for it. They can't accept that unionists believe in the status quo and won't be moved. Not now. Not ever. These loyalists harbour deep suspicions that in that kind of eventuality, Northern Ireland will resemble Bosnia in the 1990s more than Hong Kong in the 2020s. What I find lacking in the conversations around the table is a proactive case being put for the Union between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Simply articulating a loyalty to a London government that seems somewhat distant from the everyday realities of the people in this part of Northern Ireland seems futile and unproductive. Historian Marianne Elliott observed in The Financial Times how Northern Ireland, a 'has some way to go before its siege mentality evaporates sufficiently for constructive discussion to take place about its long-term future'. There is more than a hint of this 'siege mentality' around the table in Ballymoney. It is like collective mourning for a loss not yet experienced. It reminds me of the tenor of those conversations I had in North Belfast 20 years earlier and have had with some unionists and loyalists every year since. It is as if millenarian loyalism repeats its narrative of political anxiety and insecurity continuously so it can resist breaking free from the spell uncertainty holds over its adherents. A few months after the Twelfth, I'm in London to interview Dr John Kyle, then deputy leader of the PUP, on the topic of 'Understanding Northern Irish Loyalism'. I have huge respect for the practical peacebuilding and conflict transformation work Dr Kyle has conducted and was proud to work alongside him on some of these initiatives. His message is upbeat and optimistic and far removed from that shared with me by millenarian loyalism. Ithink we are in difficult times,' he says. 'I think there is a lot of insecurity out there and I think some unscrupulous people want to take advantage of that - and exploit it. There are genuine concerns… Unionists, loyalists are concerned about a drift that, whereas GB heads off in this direction after Brexit …Northern Ireland, which is tethered to the EU, begins to move in this direction. And so there's a growing divergence between Northern Ireland and the rest of the United Kingdom. 'That is, I think for many people… a real concern. There are things that can be done to address that. But I don't think it's possible to have Brexit without there being some downside to it for Northern Ireland. Politicians need to be honest and say that. You know, we can't go back to the days before Brexit. We need to look at what opportunities there are to see how we can build on it and benefit from it and not just see it entirely as a loss to unionism.' I'm eager to get Dr Kyle's take on the future. He says: 'There are difficult negotiations ahead. I think we can resolve the problems around Brexit… but it will take some serious negotiations and some work in good faith from all parties. Brexit has destabilised Northern Ireland… and Sinn Féin are pushing for a border poll. The opinion polls suggest that more people are more open to considering a united Ireland. 'Many of the middle-ground, middle-class community in Northern Ireland who would have voted Remain don't view a united Ireland with the negative analysis that they had maybe 20 years ago. 'So definitely the mood has changed. However, a border poll that results in 52% in favour of a united Ireland and 48% in favour of remaining in the United Kingdom, to my mind, would be an absolute disaster. It would plunge us into all sorts of problems and uncertainties. 'However, there is enormous potential for… an inclusive Northern Ireland… where the strengths of both communities can be synergistic in creating a Northern Ireland that is successful, that is peaceful, that is respectful, that is creative, that has expressions of its Irish members [who] can express their Irishness, the British component can express their Britishness and they can live together in a productive and effective way. 'But it does need us to work together to achieve that - not brushing our differences under the carpet, but being able to disagree and to disagree in a good way. And I think that if our parties are prepared to [work together in an instructive and in a collaborative way], and prepared to address the injustices in our society, prepared to acknowledge the mistakes that were made in the past, then I think the future, actually, is very positive for Northern Ireland.' I agree with Dr Kyle's contention that there is a need to heal divisions. This must start within the wider unionist community in Northern Ireland and stem from a greater understanding of the concept of political union. This book has been a contribution to that goal. ? A People Under Siege: The Unionists of Northern Ireland by Aaron Edwards is pub- lished by Merrion Press, (EURO)20. LOYALIST CULTURE MESMERISED BY RITUAL ACT OF BURNING WHAT IT CREATES THEY HAVE A SELFISH VIEW OF HUMAN NATURE AND OF THEIR OWN INTERESTS ENORMOUS POTENTIAL FOR INCLUSIVE NORTHERN IRELAND… IF WE WORK TOGETHER Graphic    AFLAME: Loyalist bonfire in Larne, Co. Antrim, in 2022DIVISION: Clash between, loyalists, nationalists and police in east Belfast in 2013 GB ism oveTRADITIONS: Twelfth of July parade in North Belfast Load-Date: July 9, 2023  End of Document
