   It was a knife in the front; Boris Johnson's allies have long blamed his downfall on rivals in the Tory ranks - most of all our current PM. Was 'Boris betrayer' R r' Rishi Sunak responsible? In an exclusive extract from his new book, Telegraph political editor Ben Riley-Smith reveals the real story The Daily Telegraph (London) September 16, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: TELEGRAPH MAGAZINE;FEATURES; Pg. 6,7,8,9,11,12 Length: 4219 words Body   F-k! F-k!' Boris Johnson was seething. 'He's trying to f-k me!' The Prime Minister had just been told that the second most important figure in his government had quit. Rishi Sunak was out - and without giving his boss any www.warning.No meeting was requested by the Chancellor to explain his reasons, as had been the case with Sajid Javid, the departing Health Secretary, earlier that day, 5 July 2022. There was no conversation over the phone; not even a text. It fell to the Number 10 political secretary to tell his boss a resignation letter was on the way. Johnson was raging. 'Who the f-k does he think he is?' Sunak had been a lowly local government minister when Boris reached the top as Conservative Party leader back in 2019. It was Johnson who had brought him into the Cabinet, first as Chief Secretary to the Treasury and then, aged just 39, as Chancellor. Now, three years on, he was going, swiping at Johnson's ethics and economics as he went. 'It was basically a knife in the front,' said a Boris ally who was by his side that day. The power dynamics between the pair had been shifting Number 11's way for months. During the Covid pandemic, they had worked well together. It was over what came next - how to control spending and meet Tory demands for tax cuts - that tensions emerged. By the start of 2022, with the Prime Minister facing backbench revolt over the Partygate saga and Sunak topping potential-successor lists, things were deteriorating. Then came the blindsiding resignation. The act would cast a long shadow over the Conservative Party. 'Boris betrayer' would be the tag stapled on to Sunak, with consequences in the leadership race that would follow. A year on, Johnson allies would still be pointing the finger of blame his way when explaining Boris's 'ouster'. Certainly the downfall was exceptional, a head-scratching collapse. Johnson had won the biggest Tory majority in the House of Commons since Margaret Thatcher in 1987. Then, in less than three years, he had gone from top dog to mincemeat. So, just how much blame can be laid at Sunak's door for Johnson's descent? And was more happening behind the scenes than the public knew? Interviews with Downing Street advisers, senior civil servants, government officials and personal friends of both men carried out for my new book, The Right To Rule - plus more than 20 of Boris's own Cabinet ministers - offer clues to an explanation. Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak were not always rivals. Quite the reverse. For much of his premiership Johnson saw their relationship as one of 'mentor' and 'mentee', according to one Boris aide. Another said he grew to view Sunak as his natural successor. In meetings with senior journalists the Prime Minister would gush over his Chancellor's brilliance. It was Sunak's obvious financial expertise that saw him handed the keys to the Treasury when Sajid Javid first quit in February 2020. He was thrown straight into an economic challenge of mindspinning proportions: the biggest drop in national output for three centuries as the first countrywide lockdown was announced to tackle Covid-19 six weeks later. During the countless internal debates about pandemic policy that followed, the pair were often of similar mind. But as the crisis eased with the mass rollout of vaccines in early to mid-2021, the focus turned to how to manage the post-pandemic economy. Johnson, with his populist instinct, was a big spender having vowed to end austerity and seeing pound signs as the easy way out of many political binds. Sunak had a firmer ideological commitment to traditional low-spend, low-debt and ideally low-tax Tory economics, seeing fiscal prudence as the way forward. 'He was quite alarmed by how much the state had grown during the pandemic,' said one person by Sunak's side then. 'He always wanted to get back to a form of state where you don't need to tax as much and the private sector does more of the heavy lifting.' But Johnson had other ideas. There would be an early, telling clash over social-care policy - Boris demanding the extra spending, Sunak saying a National Insurance rise would have to pay for it. The move split Tories and soured Number 10-Number 11 relations. When did Sunak start thinking about the Tory leadership? And when did he start acting on that thought? Perhaps it is an unfair question. As Johnson liked to remind aides when things got turbulent, almost every Tory MP has half an eye on becoming prime minister. He spoke from personal experience. Westminster is a place of outsized egos, something Johnson could be forgiving about, according to allies. After all, he had always been an obsessive competitor himself. When playing one Cabinet minister's nine-year-old son at tennis, he insisted on marking the score after every point. Aides who had played on the court at his Oxfordshire cottage joked that he used old balls scrubbed of fuzz to obtain an advantage. And he had once been so determined to gain the upper hand as London mayor that he snatched David Cameron's notes off the table during talks, prompting a schoolboy-like tussle. But during Johnson's eventual descent, there are an array of facts - some of which can be made public here for the first time - that show actions to prepare Sunak for Number 10 taking place behind the scenes earlier than is commonly acknowledged. One such indicator came in late autumn 2021, when a special adviser to then Northern Ireland Secretary Brandon Lewis overheard the Chancellor's inner team in a Westminster pub discussing the shape of a Sunak premiership. 'They were literally plotting out who they thought should be in various positions in the Cabinet,' said a source familiar with what was heard. Idle chitchat, perhaps. Another came later that year, on 23 December, with the registration of a domain name: www.readyforrishi.com. It was the slogan that the Sunak campaign would adopt come the Tory leadership race the following July. By that point the site was redirecting visitors to the official campaign website, www.ready4rishi.com. More than a year on, Sunak allies were making only a half-hearted attempt to suggest the registration had not been done by someone in his orbit. There is no explanation - if it was a random outsider - as to how they had correctly guessed Sunak's campaign slogan. It was around the time of the registration that the PM let slip his worries about Sunak as a potential leadership rival. 'Just promise me one thing,' he pleaded with Lynton Crosby, the Australian election guru and Johnson's most trusted political sage, during one of their many calls. 'You won't help Rishi.' 'Why would I help him?' replied Crosby. 'Oh well, you know...' the Prime Minister tailed off. His suspicions of a Downing Street neighbour considering what next were not without foundation. Long before Johnson fell, some Cabinet ministers felt they were being sounded out by Sunak with an eye to potential support. Lewis was invited to breakfast with Sunak in late 2021 and again in early 2022. During one of their conversations Sunak remarked that Lewis would make a good home secretary, according to one wellplaced source. Later, around June, then Home Secretary Priti Patel was urged by Sunak allies to meet him, another approach interpreted as a sounding-out. Both were ministers loyal to Johnson, meaning recollections may have been coloured by what followed, but the claims circulate nonetheless. Some approaches were more explicit. In February 2022, after the publication of Sue Gray's initial findings about Partygate, Sunak talked to ministers and parliamentary private secretaries in the Treasury asking outright for their backing. 'Boris Johnson isn't going to carry on for ever. There will be a contest at some point. Will you support me if I decide to run?' he said, or words to that effect, according to one who was approached. All but two of the MPs connected to the department would end up endorsing Sunak. Whispers of Rishi backers on manoeuvres also reached Number 10. A senior Downing Street adviser heard two reports around April of Oliver Dowden, the Conservative Party co-chairman and a close political friend of Sunak, going 'slightly off topic' during dinners and 'building the case for Rishi'. The source dismissed the speculation, believing Dowden loyal - but later deemed this a miscalculation. Were other Tory leadership contenders also eyeing up a run? No doubt. But the public nature of Sunak's willingness to hold Boris at arm's length was different from that of other future rivals. It was underscored in January, when Johnson confirmed he had attended the 'bring your own booze' Downing Street garden party and apologised in the Commons, prompting a flurry of Tory MP resignation calls. Amid a feverish atmosphere in Westminster, Cabinet ministers went public with messages of support for the PM. Loyalists were effusive in their praise and quick to offer it. As the hours ticked by, the number of silent ministers dwindled. One notable exception was Sunak, who took hours to respond before tweeting carefully caveated backing. The Chancellor's team noted that on that day Sunak had been in the Devon town of Ilfracombe. But patchy signal alone does not explain an eight-hour silence. Boris Johnson was prone to believing in political conspiracies. Many friends and former advisers attest as much. One wild and unsubstantiated rumour he voiced was that Sunak's father-inlaw, Indian billionaire Narayana Murthy, had Dominic Cummings on a retainer. There is no suggestion it was accurate. Yet 'Boris believed it to be true', said the senior Johnson Cabinet minister who relayed the story. Despite the absence of proof, the idea of great forces thwarting him - money, a rival and a former adviser turned nemesis all wrapped up together - somehow www.appealed.No doubt by 2022 Cummings wanted his former boss gone. He would release damning claims about Johnson in Substack blog posts after leaving Westminster. The idea that something similar was happening in private is not fanciful. But seeing a Cummings puppet master behind every negative story was incorrect. And so the narrative pushed by Johnson allies of an 'orchestrated' ouster - whether by Sunak or Cummings - is too convenient. It absolves him, and them, of any responsibility. There are, however, three stories grounded in fact that are worth retelling when it comes to the question of Sunak, his allies and their role in Johnson's fall. One involved a man known to almost nobody outside Westminster: Dougie Smith. The Scot had been a constant feature behind the scenes in the long Tory run in government since 2010, variously described in press cuttings as a political fixer and a modern-day Machiavelli. Boris grew to rely on Smith to sort out political problems, according to Number 10 insiders. But Smith was also close to Sunak. He had helped Sunak get selected as the Tory candidate for Richmond (Yorks) for the 2015 election. A Sunak ally said Smith had been 'continually supportive' and was 'definitely a friend'. Which makes what followed so intriguing. In February 2022, Johnson got a call from Smith. Six Johnson inner-circle figures have described it to me, most saying it happened on the day Smith's wife, Munira Mirza, quit as head of Boris's policy unit. Smith warned Johnson he was at risk of being forced from office, the sources said. The phrase attributed to Smith is variously quoted as 'they're going to get you' or 'we're going to get you'. Given that only Johnson and Smith are likely to have been on the call, and that the remarks are in wider circulation because Boris described it to others, it is difficult to prove categorically what was said. Was the tone one of warning or threat? What is certainly true is that Johnson has since concluded it was the latter - that is, part of a plot against him - and told others as much. Smith would find himself sidelined under Liz Truss, Johnson's successor. But when Sunak took over, he was back in the fold, once again with a Number 10 pass and freedom to roam Downing Street. The second incident came on 12 April 2022, the day both Johnson and Sunak were fined for breaking Covid laws over the PM's birthday gathering in the Cabinet Room. Johnson was at Chequers when the news broke. Allies rejected the idea of getting him driven back to Number 10 because there was a broadcast helicopter hovering overhead - they did not want an 'OJ' moment, with Boris's car tracked as it sped along - so joined him there instead. That afternoon things got worse. Sunak was on the brink of resigning. Those at Chequers recalled a fraught Johnson, one saying it was 'very clear' that Rishi might walk. A Sunak insider confirmed this was correct, explaining: 'He believes a lot in upholding rules.' Such a development would have been disastrous for Johnson - if the Chancellor was quitting over the fine, why wasn't the Prime Minister? In the end, Sunak made the eyecatching move of drafting a full resignation statement. The words were shared with Lord Hague, the former Tory leader and a Times columnist, who had preceded Sunak as MP for Richmond. Soon, with more people at the company also having separately found out about the draft statement, whispers of the dramatic move were spreading among senior figures at Rupert Murdoch's newspaper. Johnson even told others Murdoch intervened to urge Sunak not to quit, saying the media tycoon had personally told him as much. The story is still passed on by Johnson's allies. However, a Sunak source said Rishi did not get a direct call or text from Murdoch. A spokesperson for News UK, Murdoch's British publishing company, declined to comment, while a Johnson spokesperson said he did not recognise the account. At the end of the day, Sunak was warned offquitting, some of those consulted fearing that naivety was being shown given that inadvertently toppling Boris could damn his leadership hopes. He backed down, but a hint of the wobble was found on the next day's Times front page. Rishi had come close to quitting Johnson's Cabinet - and likely bringing down the Prime Minister - three months earlier than he did. The final story involves Tory MP Oliver Dowden, a friend of Sunak, who had co-written an article endorsing Johnson for the leadership in 2019. He and his two coauthors - Sunak was one - were handed Cabinet jobs after Johnson won. But Dowden had slipped down the pecking order, moved from Culture Secretary to Conservative Party co-chairman in September 2021 - theoretically a senior role but one with no direct impact on government policy. The demotion smarted, multiple Johnson and Sunak allies have said. On the morning after a double Tory by-election loss - Wakefield, plus Tiverton and Honiton - in June 2022, Johnson was in Rwanda for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting when Dowden called. He was quitting the Cabinet. 'Somebody has to carry the can, somebody has to take responsibility for the bad results in the local elections,' he said. The Prime Minister felt as though his party co-chairman was reading from a script. Dowden quickly hung up and Johnson sounded the alarm. A Cabinet ring-round confirmed that no one else was walking, but it was another blow. Within a fortnight, Boris would be forced out. Did Dowden quit to help ease Sunak's path? He has vehemently denied it and Sunak allies insisted there was no 'coordination'. But Johnson thought otherwise, even then. 'Rishi will be next,' Jake Berry, an MP loyal to Johnson, recalled telling the PM. 'One hundred per cent. They're working together on it,' came the response, according to Berry. Dowden would eventually become Sunak's Deputy PM. The stories underscore how Sunak and his allies played a part in Johnson's downfall, no doubt hastening the end. But that should not be mistaken for swallowing the narrative - pushed by Team Boris - that his premiership only ended because of Sunak. Circumstance played a part, a oncein-a-century pandemic rocking the government and putting huge strains on the public purse. So too did Partygate, the defining scandal of his tenure, which drained support from voters and MPs. But also, crucially, there were Johnson's own whims and weaknesses. What became apparent from speaking to those who worked with him was that Johnson's lack of a deep-rooted ideology, along with an instinct to delay decisions when faced with conflict and a susceptibility to switch positions on issues not key to his political survival, slowed Whitehall. His lack of interest in the boring bits of the job - from engaging with the mechanics of Parliament to driving through changes - was problematic too. When it came to the serious work of governing there were notable differences from his predecessors. One concerned the ministerial red box. Each evening, the Prime Minister, in common with other government ministers, is handed a box full of papers relating to pressing decisions that need sign-off. Cameron liked to tackle the contents early in the morning. Theresa May was methodical, spending hours late at night on hers. Johnson was less regimented, according to multiple aides. Less systematic would be a kind way of putting it; too often indifferent a harsher one. Said one adviser, 'Some days he just didn't bother- Often we submitted papers again and again.' Delays meant that at times decisions had to be forced. Martin Reynolds, Johnson's top privateoffice civil servant, sometimes had to WhatsApp summaries of issues in need of urgent decisions. Word even spread that a special adviser had figured out a sure-fire way to grab Boris's attention: start submissions with an eye-catching quote, in the manner of an Oxbridge essay. The way Johnson approached meetings could also undercut the push for speedy decisions. Here a consistent picture emerges from the accounts of many Cabinet ministers. Civil servants would produce an itemised discussion plan, only for Johnson to roam as he pleased. 'He hates somebody steering a meeting,' said one minister. 'He wanted to have a wider discussion but that means he can go offon a tangent and you have to fight incredibly hard to keep him on track.' Another said 'you'd be lucky' if 25 per cent of the time in a meeting was spent on the issue at hand. Friendly ministers framed this as the PM following his nose. Others called it a lack of necessary focus. His limited interest in Parliament, while not uncommon for prime ministers, could be an issue too. He had a massive majority in the Commons, but not in the House of Lords. 'Can't you just bosh this on?' an exasperated Johnson would ask Lords Leader Baroness Evans as legislation stalled there. 'That's not how it works,' she would reply. In the Commons, Johnson's 'eyes glazed over' if someone mentioned Standing Orders, the rules governing how MPs conduct business. These were not big issues, but reflected how he was not a master of process. It was often said Johnson is not a 'details' person. That is too simplistic, according to those interviewed. When he needed to, on an issue of pressing importance or personal political risk, he dove into details. On the intricacies of the Brexit deal during talks, or Russian incursions in Ukraine, he would consume information. He could surprise ministers by drilling into unexpected details. 'Nobody can go into a room and assume you can bluff with Boris,' said Michael Gove. At times, though, other ministers left meetings frustrated by his lack of focus. 'Where he was perhaps less good was on the boring bits of the administration,' said Eddie Lister, his chief of staff in London City Hall and a senior figure in the early Number 10 months. 'He can do it when he wants to do it and when he sees it's necessary, but it's not where he wants to be.' A firm friend of Johnson, who in public would be considered one of his most prominent allies, reached a bleaker conclusion: 'He's a columnist, right? Columnists are used to writing their column, forgetting it and moving on to the next one. And you can't as a national leader operate in that way. You have to follow through- He never made a transition from being someone who could entertain and attract attention and emotionally connect to the hard work of being Prime Minister. He was ill-disciplined.' In the deadline-driven world of journalism he had a reputation for filing just under the wire. It was the same in government, as one Number 10 adviser explained: 'One of Boris's techniques is where the system leans towards taking decisions early, he will try to leave it as long as possible.' Political calculation was a factor. A lack of ingrained policy convictions may have complicated things too. Layered on top is an aversion to conflict, another feature of his tenure mentioned by many insiders. 'To get through a difficult moment he'll say whatever you want to hear,' said one friend, 'then five minutes later he'll say whatever somebody else wants to hear.' His long-term adviser and later lead Brexit negotiator, David Frost, has his own take: 'I think his big problem as PM was that he wasn't clear enough on what he thought himself about problems. Sometimes no decision was really final. If somebody could get to him later you'd have a chance of changing it.' Sometimes Cabinet ministers would text Johnson in a frantic lobbying effort during group video calls. Others used WhatsApp to get round the usual channels. Securing face time was seen as a third route to influence, leading to tussles about who would be last with Boris before a decision was taken. In Johnsonland, a yes was not guaranteed to stay a yes; a no need not be the end of the debate. Did the problem run deeper? Johnson's shape-shifting as he climbed the political ladder led some to question whether he knew what he wanted to achieve with high office. In his university days, he ran twice to be Oxford Union president, the first time displaying Tory views (and losing), and a second time aligning himself with the Social Democratic Party. That time around he won. Then, as mayor of Labour-voting London, Johnson projected a liberal vision, advocating an amnesty for illegal migrants and championing gay marriage. But as chief Brexiteer, he threw in his lot with the Tory Right. To critics, the clearest thread running through Johnson's stances was saying what was needed to advance. During the 2019 leadership contest, Johnson's aides had detected concern among Tory MPs about his lack of specificity on issues beyond Brexit, and set him a task: to write down what he believed. That the exercise was even needed said something of his chameleon ideology. He needed a vision. A form of big-tent, big-spending Conservatism would emerge, but shuddered under the weight of its own contradictions. Critics still question whether, beyond delivering Brexit, a reforming mission to match his majority ever existed. One of the most senior mandarins who served him addressed the point: 'He didn't really have a programme. I think that was, in a sense, almost concealed by Covid...' Boris Johnson was one of the most consequential British political figures of his generation. He led the Brexit campaign, won the public's backing and then delivered that change in office, reshaping the country's entire economic and diplomatic strategy in a single swoop. He held the levers of power when a pandemic struck and rushed to Kyiv's support when Russia launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine. But he was toppled after a slew of unforced errors. One former Conservative Party leader, among just a few politicians to have seen the pressures of that job from the inside, said historians would 'struggle' to comprehend Johnson's fall from the biggest Tory Commons majority in 32 years to his resignation as PM. But to put his downfall down solely to an 'ouster', or rebels who played a part during the slide, would be remiss. For that narrative ignores the critical wider reality. The reason Johnson lost his premiership was not Sunak; it was not Sunak who had allowed a culture of Covid law-breaking to develop in Downing Street, with some 126 fines being issued to 83 people over at least eight events. It was not Sunak who rolled out blanket public denials that would be proved palpably false. Yet it was Sunak, with Javid, who triggered the end. The real problem - and root of Johnson's demise - was nothing to do with Sunak. 'He kept making the same mistake, which was getting himself into a terrible position by not telling the truth, getting other people to go out and say the same thing, then the house of cards collapsing,' the former leader said. 'If you ask, "Why is Boris Johnson not still Prime Minister?" the only answer I can come up with is that there were these personal failings. I mean, how do you go from having an 80-seat majority to going in three years?!' How indeed. Abridged extract from The Right To Rule, out 28 September (John Murray, £25); pre-order at www.books.telegraph.co.uk. See tomorrow's newspaper for the next extract: the secret warnings that made Liz Truss ditch Kwasi Kwarteng and her flagship tax cuts Sunak's friend Dougie Smith is variously quoted as telling Johnson 'they're going to get you' or 'we're going to get you' Rishi had come close to quitting the Cabinet - and likely bringing down Boris - three months earlier than he did 'Boris never made a transition from being someone who could entertain and attract attention to the hard work of being PM' Graphic    Left: the two men give a Covid briefing, October 2020. Below: Johnson with his partner Carrie, election night 2019PARSONS PARSONS/ ANDREW IMAGES, GETTY PAGE: THIS IMAGES. GETTY IMAGES, PA PAGE: PREVIOUSFrom top: former Johnson Cabinet member Brandon Lewis; Liz Truss succeeds Johnson; with Priti Patel, 2019IMAGES GETTYFrom top: the then Prime Minister and Chancellor at Downing Street; Johnson's political sage Lynton CrosbyIMAGES GETTY PRESS, CAMERA Load-Date: September 16, 2023  End of Document
