   Johnson is awful - but he saved democracy; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR The Sunday Times (London) June 18, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 769 words Body   Boris Johnson is a dreadful, amoral wrecking-ball of a man. However, he delivered an astonishing parliamentary majority and thereby achieved the Brexit that the people had voted for. Yet in his column "Johnson's Brexit chicanery has led us into Doublethink Britain" (Comment, last week), Matthew Syed just knows, apparently, why people voted as they did, that they made a gross error and that they now have buyer's remorse. Syed is often thoughtful and interesting, but press the Brexit button and he becomes a sclerotic bore. He needs to consider his own support for democracy. Its survival depends upon losing parties accepting the result. Tim Harrison Castle Acre, Norfolk Not deceived I respect the way Syed writes, but not the way he preaches. He says the largest expression of democratic will in recent history was purely a result of Boris Johnson's "charming deceit". Well, I don't like Johnson much either, and I was not deceived. I voted for Brexit because I value freedom of thought, democratic choice, and economic and judicial independence. That the result has been handled incompetently by shallow strivers does not change this. Alisdair Low Ramsdean, Hampshire Conspiracy of silence Syed is right about Johnson's role in the deceit of Brexit and the nation's failure to accept the consequences. However, if he hopes that a politician will honestly admit this, I fear he will be disappointed. Our politicians are not good at conveying messages they think the electorate doesn't want to hear. Human nature being what it is, it must be very difficult for Leave voters to admit that they were conned by a charlatan into voting to make themselves, their children and their grandchildren worse off. Gordon Lethbridge Sherborne, Dorset Double trouble In just over a thousand words Syed has demolished the twin myths of Boris Johnson and Brexit - the lies, hypocrisy, contradictions and delusions. I can think of no better summary of Britain's political and economic conundrum. Haroun Rashid, London SW7 Terrible twins Having enjoyed Anthony Seldon's excellent critique "He has caused damage beyond measure. But his vanity won't let him see it" (News, last week), I read the article again but substituted Donald Trump and America for Boris Johnson and Britain. It was almost seamless. The similarity between their characters and the effect they have had on the political discourse of their respective countries is uncanny. Bob Marlow, Sutton Coldfield Playing the martyr Johnson has been exposed as a liar, but he still has support among those who think bluff and bluster are more important than honesty. Any hint that he is being treated too harshly - for example, if his parliamentary pass is removed - will strengthen his claim to martyrdom. Populist politicians love this tactic. The Commons should therefore deny him the chance to make that claim. Otherwise we could face the disaster of another Johnson government. Francis Bown, London E3 No remorse Had Johnson been prepared to acknowledge his wrongdoing, the recommendations of the privileges committee might have seemed harsh. However, he has shown not the slightest shred of remorse - indeed, the very opposite. Given this, his punishment seems eminently appropriate and necessary. Adrian Cosker, Hitchin, Herts Skipping trial It is common now for those found guilty of crimes to stay in their cell rather than appear in the dock to face their sentencing. Surely this is what Johnson did by resigning from his position as an MP before the Commons, or his constituents, could proceed to judgment upon him. Tom Stubbs, Surbiton What a carry-on Those who have any influence on Johnson should tell him that it is time to act with dignity. He might watch footage of Margaret Thatcher's behaviour when she left No 10. His present behaviour is more reminiscent of Kenneth Williams's immortal line: "Infamy, infamy - they've all got it in for me!" Anthony Carr Sompting, West Sussex Clocking out MPs must be one of the very few groups who are allowed to resign "with immediate effect". What happens to all those constituents who have important cases pending? Robert Ritchie, Ayr Ejector seat An MP is elected by constituents to represent them in parliament. If the MP then deprives them of representation by resigning in a fit of pique, they should be barred from ever standing for parliament again. Lewis James, Penarth Liar, liar, liar, liar Sacked by his employer for lying. Sacked by a Conservative leader for lying. Sacked by his MPs for lying. And now, effectively, sacked by parliament for lying. Yet Johnson still believes he is the victim. Ian Bailey Tarporley, Cheshire Graphic    Opinion on Brexit is still divided; on Boris Johnson, less so Load-Date: June 18, 2023  End of Document
