   Johnson quits as MP over partygate; Former prime minister says Commons inquiry is a 'kangaroo court' intent on forcing him out 'Political titan' most successful Tory leader since Thatcher, says Patel The Daily Telegraph (London) June 10, 2023 Saturday Edition 2, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 1,2 Length: 1323 words Byline: Daniel Martin; Ben Riley-Smith; Nick Gutteridge Body   BORIS JOHNSON stood down as an MP last night, claiming a House of Com mons inquiry was determined to find him guilty over partygate. In a move that stunned Westminster, he accused the privileges committee of acting as a "kangaroo court" that was intent on forcing him out. He said there had been a "witch hunt" among some Tory MPs who saw his removal as a necessary first step to the reversal of Brexit. The former prime minister also attacked Rishi Sunak, accusing him of abandoning key Conservative positions as he called on the party to recover its "mojo". The decision will trigger a by-election in the marginal seat of Uxbridge and South Ruislip. However, Mr Johnson left the door open for a return to the Commons, saying he was sad to be leaving Parliament "for now". In a statement, Mr Johnson said the Privileges Committee was "determined to use the proceedings against me to drive me out of Parliament. "They have still not produced a shred of evidence that I knowingly or recklessly misled the Commons." He added: "Their purpose from the beginning has been to find me guilty, regardless of the facts. This is the very definition of a kangaroo court." The Privileges Committee wrote a "warning letter" to Mr Johnson earlier this week outlining how it intends to criticise him in its final report. It is understood that it recommended a suspension of more than 10 days, meaning a recall petition triggering a by-election would have been possible. The committee has been investigating whether he knowingly misled Parliament when he told MPs there had been no lockdown parties in Downing Street. The report into whether Mr Johnson misled MPs over partygate is now due to be published next week, with the timing brought forward after his statement. A Privileges Committee spokesman said: "The committee has followed the procedures and the mandate of the House at all times and will continue to do so. Mr Johnson has departed from the processes of the House and has impugned the integrity of the House by his statement. The committee will meet on Monday to conclude the inquiry and to publish its report promptly." Mr Johnson's announcement came just hours after Nadine Dorries, the former culture secretary, resigned and triggered a by-election in Mid Bedfordshire after a peerage she thought she was getting was blocked. Mr Johnson's resignation honours list, in which he elevated seven of his friends and close allies to the House of Lords, was published just a few hours before he announced his resignation. His shock departure means one of the Conservative Party's biggest figures in the last two decades is exiting frontline politics. In an attack on the direction in which Mr Sunak has taken the party, Mr Johnson said: "Our party needs urgently to recapture its sense of momentum and its belief in what this country can do. "We need to show how we are making the most of Brexit and we need in the next months to be setting out a progrowth and pro-investment agenda. We need to cut business and personal taxes - and not just as pre-election gimmicks - rather than endlessly putting them up. "We must not be afraid to be a properly Conservative government." He accused Mr Sunak of having "passively abandoned" the prospect of a free trade deal with the US. "We need to deliver on the 2019 manifesto, which was endorsed by 14 million people. We should remember that more than 17 million voted for Brexit." He accused committee chairman Harriet Harman of having "already expressed "deeply prejudicial remarks about my guilt before they had even seen the evidence", adding that she should have recused herself. He said he was naive to believe that the proceedings could be fair, adding it was the same faith in impartiality that led him to commission Sue Gray to look into his conduct. "It is clear that my faith has been misplaced. Of course, it suits the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats, and the SNP to do whatever they can to remove me from Parliament. "Sadly, as we saw in July last year, there are currently some Tory MPs who share that view. I am not alone in thinking that there is a witch hunt under way, to take revenge for Brexit and ultimately to reverse the 2016 referendum result. "My removal is the necessary first step, and I believe there has been a concerted attempt to bring it about. I am afraid I no longer believe that it is any coincidence that Sue Gray - who investigated gatherings in Number 10 - is now the chief of staff designate of the Labour leader." Mr Johnson was first elected to the Commons as MP for Henley in 2001 alongside David Cameron and George Osborne, part of a new Tory generation. He would later go on to serve two terms as London mayor - winning in the capital, which traditionally votes Labour - before returning to Parliament in his Uxbridge and South Ruislip seat at the 2015 general election. Mr Johnson has been dubbed one of the most consequential prime ministers of recent decades because of his central role in delivering the UK's exit from the European Union. He was the figurehead of the Leave campaign in the 2016 referendum which saw the country vote for Brexit and then secured the departure when in Downing Street on Jan 31 2020. Mr Johnson's three-year run in Downing Street, from July 2019 to September 2022, was brought to an end after a spate of ministerial resignations. "His resignation is complicated by the fact that Mr Johnson had long been rumoured to be considering a switch of constituencies, given he was at risk from defeat due to a slim majority in Uxbridge. Although his statement suggests he could return to Parliament, how and when that could come is unclear. "A general election is due before the end of next year, leaving little time for an about-turn. Any attempt to be selected as the Tory candidate in a different seat could be complicated by his tense relationship with Mr Sunak, who quit Mr Johnson's Cabinet, triggering his fall. Revealing his resignation, Mr Johnson said: "I have today written to my Association in Uxbridge and South Ruislip to say I am stepping down forthwith and triggering an immediate by-election. "It is very sad to be leaving Parliament - at least for now - but above all I am bewildered and appalled that I can be forced out, anti-democratically, by a committee chaired and managed, by Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 (former Labour deputy leader) Harriet Harman, with such egregious bias." He added: "I did not lie and I believe that in their hearts the committee know it. But they have wilfully chosen to ignore the truth because from the outset their purpose has not been to discover the truth, or genuinely to understand what was in my mind when I spoke in the Commons. Mr Johnson insisted he was innocent over partygate, saying: "I have received a letter from the Privileges Committee making it clear - much to my amazement - that they are determined to use the proceedings against me to drive me out of parliament. "They have still not produced a shred of evidence that I knowingly or recklessly misled the Commons. "They know perfectly well that when I spoke in the Commons I was saying what I believed sincerely to be true and what I had been briefed to say, like any other minister." Last night Priti Patel, the former home secretary, told The Telegraph: "Boris Johnson has served our country and his constituency with distinction. "He led the world in supporting Ukraine and defending our values, he got Brexit done, and he secured suc cesses for the Conservative Party not seen since Margaret Thatcher. "Boris is a political titan whose legacy will stand the test of time." Angela Rayner, deputy Labour leader and shadow chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, said: "The British public are sick to the back teeth of this never ending Tory soap opera played out at their expense. "After 13 years of Conservative chaos, enough is enough." 'I am not alone in thinking that there is a witch hunt under way against me, to take revenge for Brexit' Graphic    Boris Johnson's resignation will trigger an immediate by-election in the marginal seat of Uxbridge and south ruislipNICHOLLS PETER REUTERS/ Load-Date: June 10, 2023  End of Document
