   Johnson quits before he is forced out - with savage attack on Sunak i-news June 10, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 1724 words Byline: Richard Vaughan Body   Boris Johnson declared war on Rishi Sunak last night as he sensationally quit as an MP, taking aim at Conservative colleagues who wanted to remove him from Parliament. The former prime minister described the investigation into whether he lied to the Commons over the "Partygate" affair as a "witch hunt" run by those who wanted to take "revenge" for his role in steering the UK out of the European Union. And in a call to arms to his supporters within the Conservative ranks, he made a direct attack on Mr Sunak's administration, warning that the party needed to "recapture its sense of momentum". "We need to show how we are making the most of Brexit and we need in the next months to be setting out a pro-growth and pro-investment agenda," he said in a statement. "We must not be afraid to be a properly Conservative government." Mr Johnson was sent the findings of the Privileges Committee's investigation earlier this week, which said that it had found he deliberately misled Parliament and would be recommending a sanction that would be enough to trigger a recall petition and potentially a by-election in his Uxbridge and South Ruislip constituency. Mr Johnson insisted that he was being truthful when he told MPs that he believed "all rules were followed" when it came to the lockdown-breaking gatherings in Downing Street. In his statement, he added: "But they have wilfully chosen to ignore the truth because from the outset their purpose has not been to discover the truth, or genuinely to understand what was in my mind when I spoke in the Commons." His decision to resign sent shockwaves through Westminster. A supportive Tory minister told i that Mr Johnson's decision to jump before he was forced to face a parliamentary vote on any Privileges Committee sanction was a "demonstration of his extraordinary leadership, defending democracy and his party, ensuring no vote is required which would cause a split". Mr Johnson insisted that he "did not lie" and said of the committee: "They have still not produced a shred of evidence that I knowingly or recklessly misled the Commons." His decision to step down came after he held a series of calls with his staunch ally Nadine Dorries, who made a surprise announcement yesterday that she would resign down from her Mid-Bedfordshire seat. Mr Johnson said that he would be leaving Parliament "at least for now", prompting speculation that he was keeping alive his hopes of a political comeback. But one veteran anti-Johnson Tory said: "His statement is awful - a complete rewriting of history. MPs now need to decide whether they are going to let him take the Conservative Party down with him or use this opportunity to draw a line under the events of the past 18 months." Lockdown breaches Events under scrutiny 15 May 2020 Boris Johnson and his wife Carrie attend a cheese and wine party in the No 10 garden. 20 May 2020 Staff are invited to a "bring your own booze" event in the No 10 garden. Mr Johnson admitted he was there for 25 minutes but said he thought it was a "work event". 19 Jun 2020 No 10 staff gather for a surprise birthday party for Mr Johnson, organised by his wife. Police handed him a fixed-penalty notice. 13 Nov 2020 Mrs Johnson reportedly hosts a party in the flat above No 11, which involved drinking and dancing. Earlier, people gathered in the No 10 press office for a leaving party, with Mr Johnson briefly attending. 17 Dec 2020 The Cabinet Office holds a Christmas party while London is in Tier 3 restrictions. 18 Dec 2020 Staff exchange "secret Santa" gifts at a Christmas party. Mr Johnson is not thought to have attended. 16 Apr 2021 Two staff leaving parties are held on the night before Prince Philip's funeral. 7 May 2021 The Johnsons reportedly host a corporate events organiser at Chequers while some Covid restrictions are still in place. In his own words Johnson's resignation statement I have received a letter from the Privileges Committee making it clear - much to my amazement - that they are determined to use the proceedings against me to drive me out of Parliament. They have still not produced a shred of evidence that I knowingly or recklessly misled the Commons. They know perfectly well that when I spoke in the Commons I was saying what I believed sincerely to be true and what I had been briefed to say, like any other minister. They know that I corrected the record as soon as possible; and they know that I and every other senior official and minister - including the current Prime Minister and then occupant of the same building, Rishi Sunak - believed that we were working lawfully together. I have been an MP since 2001. I take my responsibilities seriously. I did not lie, and I believe that in their hearts the committee know it. But they have wilfully chosen to ignore the truth because from the outset their purpose has not been to discover the truth, or genuinely to understand what was in my mind when I spoke in the Commons. Their purpose from the beginning has been to find me guilty, regardless of the facts. This is the very definition of a kangaroo court. Most members of the Committee - especially the chair - had already expressed deeply prejudicial remarks about my guilt before they had even seen the evidence. They should have recused themselves. In retrospect it was naive and trusting of me to think that these proceedings could be remotely useful or fair. But I was determined to believe in the system, and in justice, and to vindicate what I knew to be the truth. It was the same faith in the impartiality of our systems that led me to commission Sue Gray. It is clear that my faith has been misplaced. Of course, it suits the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats, and the SNP to do whatever they can to remove me from Parliament. Sadly, as we saw in July last year, there are currently some Tory MPs who share that view. I am not alone in thinking that there is a witch hunt underway, to take revenge for Brexit and ultimately to reverse the 2016 referendum result. My removal is the necessary first step, and I believe there has been a concerted attempt to bring it about. I am afraid I no longer believe that it is any coincidence that Sue Gray - who investigated gatherings in Number 10 - is now the chief of staff designate of the Labour leader. Nor do I believe that it is any coincidence that her supposedly impartial chief counsel, Daniel Stilitz KC, turned out to be a strong Labour supporter who repeatedly tweeted personal attacks on me and the government. When I left office last year the government was only a handful of points behind in the polls. That gap has now massively widened. Just a few years after winning the biggest majority in almost half a century, that majority is now clearly at risk. Our party needs urgently to recapture its sense of momentum and its belief in what this country can do. We need to show how we are making the most of Brexit and we need in the next months to be setting out a pro-growth and pro-investment agenda. We need to cut business and personal taxes - and not just as pre-election gimmicks - rather than endlessly putting them up. We must not be afraid to be a properly Conservative government. Why have we so passively abandoned the prospect of a Free Trade Deal with the US? Why have we junked measures to help people into housing or to scrap EU directives or to promote animal welfare? We need to deliver on the 2019 manifesto, which was endorsed by 14 million people. We should remember that more than 17 million voted for Brexit. I am now being forced out of Parliament by a tiny handful of people, with no evidence to back up their assertions, and without the approval even of Conservative Party members let alone the wider electorate. I believe that a dangerous and unsettling precedent is being set. The Conservative Party has the time to recover its mojo and its ambition and to win the next election. I had looked forward to providing enthusiastic support as a backbench MP. Harriet Harman's committee has set out to make that objective completely untenable. The Committee's report is riddled with inaccuracies and reeks of prejudice but under their absurd and unjust process I have no formal ability to challenge anything they say. The Privileges Committee is there to protect the privileges of Parliament. That is a very important job. They should not be using their powers - which have only been very recently designed - to mount what is plainly a political hitjob on someone they oppose. It is in no one's interest, however, that the process the Committee has launched should continue for a single day further. So I have today written to my association in Uxbridge and South Ruislip to say that I am stepping down forthwith and triggering an immediate by-election. I am very sorry to leave my wonderful constituency. It has been a huge honour to serve them, both as Mayor and MP. But I am proud that after what is cumulatively a 15-year stint I have helped to deliver among other things a vast new railway in the Elizabeth Line and full funding for a wonderful new state of the art hospital for Hillingdon, where enabling works have already begun. I also remain hugely proud of all that we achieved in my time in office as prime minister: getting Brexit done, winning the biggest majority for 40 years and delivering the fastest vaccine roll-out of any major European country, as well as leading global support for Ukraine. It is very sad to be leaving Parliament - at least for now - but above all I am bewildered and appalled that I can be forced out, anti-democratically, by a committee chaired and managed, by Harriet Harman, with such egregious bias. By-election Labour confident of winning seat Resigning from his seat in Uxbridge and South Ruislip is a direct attack on Rishi Sunak's authority, and hands the Prime Minister a major headache. The west London constituency has been earmarked as a crucial seat for Labour, with Mr Johnson having held a majority of 7,210. But it has also sparked speculation Nadine Dorries deliberately stood down from her constituency to give him the chance of grabbing a safe Tory seat. One Tory insider said such a "chicken run" would cause further divisions in the Tory party. And asked if his resignation was good or bad news for the party, a minister told i: "That depends on what happens next. That depends on what happens with Bedfordshire." Richard Vaughan Load-Date: June 9, 2023  End of Document
