   Labour could tear up Brussels deal to forge closer economic links The Times (London) June 21, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 579 words Byline: Oliver Wright Body   Labour will go through Britain's Brexit trade deal "page by page" to renegotiate closer economic ties with Brussels, the party's foreign secretary has pledged. In a speech to business leaders David Lammy said a future Labour government would seek a deal to cut checks on British food exports by agreeing to uphold EU veterinary standards. He also suggested Labour was ready to look again at freedom of movement and would aim to strike a flexible mobility agreement to allow EU and UK citizens the right to travel for short-term business trips without requiring a visa. The UK's trade and co-operation agreement with the EU is due to be reopened in 2026, and Labour's proposals would greatly increase its scope. But it has led to claims by the Conservatives that Labour would abandon so-called Brexit freedoms and make it harder for the UK to gain a competitive advantage. They cite technologies such as gene editing, where the government has already relaxed previous EU regulations, as an area where the UK could return to a position of being a "rule-taker" from Brussels. Lammy reiterated that Labour was not looking to rejoin the EU, or return to the single market or customs union in the short term. But he pointedly suggested this was as much to do with European reticence as it was about a future Labour government's opposition to much closer regulatory alignment. "It's mistaken to think that after such a messy divorce it is possible to propose marriage again even before two expartners have gone on a date," he said. "The next Labour government will be focused on what is pragmatic." Lammy believed there was willingness on both sides to look again at Johnson's Brexit deal to cut barriers to trade. "We will go through the trade deal page by page, seeking ways to remove barriers and improve opportunities for business," he said. "Negotiating a veterinary agreement to ease food and agricultural trade; strengthening mutual recognition of qualifications; [and] creating new flexible labour mobility arrangements for those making short-term work trips." He added Labour would also seek to agree mutual recognition in areas such as product safety standards so British producers would no longer need to complete "two sets of tests, or two processes of certification". Lammy said that, more broadly, Labour would make a strategic assessment of diplomatic postings to prioritise the UK's "footprint in the fastestgrowing economies" and would raise the proportion of foreign office staff working to promote trade and growth. "We will deepen our diplomatic ties with countries essential to the supply chains and economies of the industries of the future, including those vital to future supply chains of critical minerals that will power our green prosperity plan," he said. William Bain, head of trade policy at the British Chambers of Commerce, said the business sector wanted "new thinking" on reducing the cost of exporting to the EU. "We need to look again at how we operate rules of origin, VAT arrangements, professional qualifications, regulatory co-operation and labour mobility," he said. "This is in the interests of businesses in both the UK and the EU." But Lee Anderson, the Conservative Party deputy chairman, said any move to reverse Brexit would put off voters in red wall seats. "Labour MPs should hit the doorsteps in Ashfield to see if real people agree with their plan to suck up to Brussels," he said. "Only the Conservative government can be trusted to protect Brexit." Load-Date: June 21, 2023  End of Document
