   LET HISTORY BE THE JUDGE; Jonathan Sumption, the outspoken former Supreme Court justice, spent 44 years writing books about the Hundred Years' War he's finally finished. He talks Brexit, lockdown and cancel culture The Sunday Times (London) August 27, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: CULTURE;FEATURES; Pg. 8,9 Length: 1806 words Byline: DAN JONES Body   The château is hard to miss. It is about the size of the rest of the village combined." Jonathan Sumption's directions to his home in the Dordogne are like his prose: precise and laced with the driest wit. The 74-year-old historian and retired Supreme Court judge appears from an archway. "I hope you don't mind children," he murmurs, leading the way through a beautiful garden, shaded by trees and a medieval tower. "We have rather a houseful." The 12th-century Château de BerbiguiÈres is buzzing with Sumption's children and grandchildren. None, though, are as old as the great intellectual child of Sumption's life: his epic history of the Hundred Years' War, the conflict fought between England, France and their European allies during the later Middle Ages. He conceived the project in 1979 when his wife, Teresa, was pregnant with their first child. "It might be rather long; perhaps three volumes," she recalls him saying. He was right and wrong. After 44 years and five books, running to about 5,000 pages, the work is finally complete. Triumph and Illusion: The Hundred Years War narrates the collapse of England's position in the war, as the French, inspired by Joan of Arc, swept the field clean. SUMPTION bases his tale on original documents he has read in archives all over western Europe. He blends tight military and political narrative with biting and often amusing pen portraits of key figures. He controls the great sweep of war without sacrificing fine detail. Triumph and Illusion is the best volume in the series. In part this is because the story of England's slow-motion defeat and expulsion from France is so horribly compelling. But it also has the advantage of being the end: the final piece of masonry slotted into place, which reveals the true shape of the building. It is a practical demonstration of Sumption's philosophy of history. "The only way to understand historical processes," he says, "is to study a single society over a long period of time." On a warm August afternoon Sumption sits in a cool, high-ceilinged drawing room in the château, occupied at one end by a grand piano. He reflects on the Hundred Years' War (it moved France into a "different power league", in England parliament controlled public finance) and much else besides. He speaks in perfectly crafted sentences, turning phrase after pithy phrase. ("John Duke of Bedford is a remarkable figure," he says, of Henry V's younger brother. "He is one of the few examples in English history of a good uncle.") He explains how he was able to write this book in less than seven years; warp speed, for him. "I retired from the Supreme Court [in 2018]. What had been a part-time activity became a fulltime one." Did that change his approach? "No. I simply did it faster." This sort of laconic answer, delivered with a habitual shrug of the shoulders, is characteristically Sumption. He began his career as an Oxford don, but left for the law in the 1970s to earn more money. As a barrister he took on high-profile, difficult cases. He represented the Blair government in the Hutton Inquiry into the Iraq WMD dossier and the Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich in a complex lawsuit brought by Boris Berezovsky. At his peak he commanded the sort of fees that enabled him to buy and renovate a castle. ("I have been financially much more successful than I ever thought possible or even desirable," he says.) Then he sat on the Supreme Court for six years. So the greatest history of the Hundred Years' War has been a side hustle ? albeit one that he thinks could not have been achieved in academia, with its demands for prolific publication and time-sapping research assessments. "You never have time to sit down and write a full-length book. In order to do it I had to become a barrister," he says, laughing. "It's absurd." Despite his immersion in the Middle Ages, Sumption is keenly interested in the modern world. He does not watch television and is occasionally bemused by pop culture references ("Who is Father Ted?" he asks over dinner, and at breakfast the next morning he requires a brief introduction to Sonic the Hedgehog). He has little time for social media. "The way in which algorithms deliberately reinforce existing prejudices and therefore eliminate nuance and doubt is a symptom of the narrowing of our intellectual world and we ought to be embarrassed about it." He is passionately interested in literature, music and the arts. In retirement he has also become a forthright commentator, publishing two volumes of essays and speeches, including his 2019 Reith Lectures on the changing relationship between law and politics. "I have tried to avoid becoming an all-purpose pundit, although you might not think so," he says with a smile. One of his topics is Brexit, which he regards as a disaster. "The idea that Britain stands in isolation from the European continent has always been a nonsense. The problem about Brexit is a historical problem. Since the reign of Elizabeth I the consistent policy of [British] governments has been to prevent a single monolithic power from dominating the European continent. It's why we fought two world wars. It's the basis of the existence of Nato. tion "By leaving the EU we have removed the principal voice against its integration into a single state. We were that voice. We have made it much more likely that this great monolith will arise. We have also guaranteed that we will have absolutely no influence over what it does. This seems to me to be a betrayal of six centuries of careful statesmanship on the spur of a moment. We should inflfluence be completely ashamed of ourselves." He has polite but searing contempt for Brexit's poster child, Boris Johnson, and "his overt attempts to transform our mode of government into a presidential type". He regards Johnson's fall as gratifying and reassuring. "We have a parliamentary system in which the sole source of legitimacy is the support of the House of Commons. Johnson's fall, and that of Liz Truss, have been exemplary affirmations of that basic rule of British politics." One theme of Sumption's writing on law is the relative merit of Britain's "political" constitution over the US's "legal" one, which is creaking badly. "The United States will not take kindly to either absolute or relative decline. But relative decline is likely to be its fate for quite a few years to come. And the political consequences of that will be far more serious in the United States than in a country like ours." Sumption was a withering opponent of Covid lockdowns imposed by Johnson's government. He criticised the policy in a series of Sunday Times columns as being unnecessary, illegally imposed and ruinously expensive. This pushed the limits of what a retired judge might be expected to say. "The conventional view is that retired judges should not speak on politically controversial issues... I actually approve of that convention although I have been an egregious breaker of it. But there are some issues that one regards as so fundamental that you basically have to stand up and be counted. I was horrified by the lockdown. I thought it was a classic example of the way you can assume quasi-absolute powers if you frighten people enough. I thought it was a failure of government and a failure of self-confidence and nerve among the British people generally, which will have terrible consequences for future generations." The argument on lockdowns was lost ? although as Sumption points out, it seems vanishingly unlikely any government would repeat the folly. He, like many others, has moved his attention to the censorious wokery sweeping academia in the West. This includes a vogue for making apologies for history. Which brings us back to the Hundred Years' War. A respected historian recently wrote that the British ought formally to apologise for Joan of Arc's burning in 1431 to help to mend post- Brexit relations with the French. "Well, that's a load of rubbish on every possible front. Quite apart from anything else, Joan of Arc's judges were French." All the same, enthusiasm for historical apologies seems deeply entrenched. "[There is a] problem of people rejecting history because all they are prepared to know about it is something that suits what is essentially a modern agenda. It probably will go away eventually, but it will take a while. I think the apology-mongers have pressed their luck further than it will go. There is a point at which the demand for apology mutates into a general sense of selflaceration, which is never a terribly popular experience... Perhaps I am being too optimistic." "  In an increasingly brittle, ofenceobsessed world, does he fear one day being cancelled for saying the wrong thing? "Yes." But not enough to stop ? thank goodness. Sumption is that rare and precious thing: a serious, decent, honest thinker of the liberal centreright. He believes in facts and truth. He understands the value of institutions. And of course he is one of our finest historians. He is already trying to figure out what to write next. The 16thcentury French wars of religion is one option. The Wars of the Roses another. Whatever he writes, he will do it wholeheartedly, forensically and his own way. As, indeed, he does everything. Implored by Teresa to comb his famous shock of white hair before having his photo taken for this interview, he shakes his head in mild perplexity. "But this is what I look like," he says. c Triumph and Illusion: The Hundred Years War (Faber, £40). Buy from www.timesbookshop.co.uk or call 020 3176 2935. Discount for Times+ members THE HUNDRED YEARS' WAR ? A POTTED HISTORY Between 1337 and 1453 England's kings fought to seize the French crown. Or did they? Sumption thinks it was really an attempt to control the whole of the Atlantic seaboard of France from Picardy to the Pyrenees. Volume 1 Trial by Battle Edward III steps into a French succession crisis, claiming to be king of France. He wins the Battle of Crécy in 1346, and takes Calais after a long siege. Volume 2 Trial by Fire Edward's son, the Black Prince, captures the French king Jean II at the Battle of Poitiers in 1356. The English exact a huge ransom and about a quarter of France's territory. Volume 3 Divided Houses Edward dies senile, succeeded by his capricious grandson Richard II. French fortunes revive, while theatres of combat open in Iberia and Flanders. Volume 4 Cursed Kings The madness of Charles VI of France and a vicious French civil war allow Henry V to win Agincourt and seize the French crown itself. Volume 5 Triumph and Illusion Henry V's death and his son's youth/ hopelessness leave English nobles clinging on to old conquests. Aided by Joan of Arc, the French eventually drive them out for good. Apologise for Joan of Arc's burning? Rubbish. Her judges were French The war moved France into a different power league Graphic    Great thinker Jonathan Sumption; below, as Supreme Court justice; Ingrid Bergman in the film Joan of Arc Load-Date: August 27, 2023  End of Document
