   Minister and industry leader ha say on future support for agriculture y have their t; Many farmers and industry leaders have returned from the Royal Highland Show with very little clarity on the plans and details of the future support system. We hear two different accounts from the woman in charge and the chief of beef. The Press and Journal July 1, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Aberdeen Journals Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: FARMING;BUSINESS; Pg. 2,3 Length: 1015 words Byline: Mairi Gougeon; Neil Shand Body   It's now been seven years since the Brexit vote, and Scotland's producers continue to pay the price for the UK Government's decision to remove us from the EU, the Single Market and the Customs Union. The UK Government's approach to Brexit continues to undermine devolution. It also reneges on promises made ahead of the EU referendum. As well as causing trade disruption, it has created significant workforce recruitment and retention issues for Scotland's food and drink sector. Many exports to the EU have fallen - including a 38% fall in fruit and vegetable exports, and a 7% fall in dairy and egg exports between 2019 and 2022. Most of all, Brexit has harmed our trading relationship with the EU, our most important trading partner and one of the world's biggest agrifood producers. EU Exit also means we no longer have long-term certainty of funding from 2025. To ensure no detriment to Scotland's farming and food production sector, we expect the UK Government to respect the devolution settlement and fully replace EU funds. But these challenges mean we need to focus more on food security as a nation and build resilience into Scotland's food system as a Good Food Nation. We all share a common goal in ensuring we support farming and food production in Scotland to become a global leader in sustainable and regenerative agriculture. As we take urgent action to tackle the climate emergency, I am determined to ensure that high quality food production is maintained. The new Agriculture Bill aims to provide a framework to support, and work with, farmers and crofters to meet more of our food needs sustainably. We recently published responses to our consultation on the new Bill, and there was broad support for the proposals. Last week, I joined farmers and crofters once again at the Royal Highland Show, where I announced more detail on what businesses can expect from the future support system. We have updated our Agriculture Reform Route Map and it contains much more information on what will change from 2025. It makes clear that our transition will be a just one - some things won't change before a new framework for support is implemented beyond 2026. These changes will only work if as many farmers and crofters as possible take part. So alongside the route map, we are embarking on an engagement programme for change. This summer, Scottish Government officials will be visiting agricultural shows, marts and area offices across Scotland, to share information and answer questions. And there are leaflets, videos and case studies available to explain the changes ahead and the support available to help farmers and crofters get ready. = Mairi Gougeon is Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs, Land Reform and the Islands Iwas fortunate enough to be invited to the QMS stand at the Royal Highland Show to hear Mairi Gougeon Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs, Land Reform and the Islands make her much anticipated announcements on the continuation of the beef calf scheme. We had more or less a full house of the mostefficient beef producers in Scotland with processors and retailers, both very well represented. It is difficult to imagine a better audience - you'd think it would be a perfect opportunity to showcase your plans and deliver to an industry that is desperate for details on how the new Agriculture Policy will look. Instead, I sat and listened in utter disbelief to a plethora of playground politics, a selection of cheap shots at the Brexit vote and Boris Johnson, and every other general dig that could be made towards Westminster. The minister bemoaned the fact Scotland had been removed from its biggest market and declared only independence would fix that. In terms of beef, England is Scotland's biggest customer and biggest market, by some distance, a fact which continues to be ignored by the party in power. I'm sorry, Ms Gougeon, but you're an elected politician, supposedly serving our industry's best interests, and we deserve better! At the very least, you should be aware of the facts and the damage that continued political ignorance of the critical state the industry is having. Our producers do not want playground politics, they want to know how you are going to fix the issues before it is too late. When the announcement on the extension of the beef calf scheme did come, it was brief and consistent with other announcements in that it was lacking in detail. The news is that it will continue but future payments will be based on calving index, with government working with the SBA and QMS on the detail. The majority of bystanders were left speechless by the lack of relevant content which had little to do with our industry and was all about independence. Although I do somehow feel sorry for Ms Gougeon, whose job was initially offered to - and turned down by - Kate Forbes. The Conservatives updated us on their rural policy on Friday - it is not much better. Lots of great sound bites, but no substance. I do not wish this to sound overly political, but neither party is appealing to the rural community at the moment. I was left with the feeling that if the SNP ditched the Greens, and fully committed to agriculture and the value of the rural economy, independence might just be achieved. By the same token, if the opposition did likewise, then it might just be stopped forever. Food for thought! What we currently have within the UK is a car crash scenario where all the home countries have agricultural support which is funded by Westminster. Since Brexit, there is no framework to constrain countries as stipulated within the CAP; in theory the whole budget in Scotland could end up in the hands of the RSPB. I was fortunate enough to attend the UK Farm To Fork summit at 10 Downing Street last month. My main request was that food production resilience and security - along with self-sufficiency - be viewed as a UK issue; devolution should have no place in this sector. It is the only way to ensure our island's food security - someone needs to wake up and smell the coffee, before it is too late. = Neil Shand is Chief Executive of the National Beef Association. Graphic    TRANSITION: A new framework for support is to be implemented beyond 2026.SUPPORT: The beef calf scheme is to continue, with payments based on calving index. Load-Date: July 1, 2023  End of Document
