   Money traps for expats to avoid; It is now harder to keep a UK account or get good savings rates if you move abroad, warns Ali Hussain The Times (London) August 19, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 53 Length: 822 words Byline: Ali Hussain Body   When Kay and Dan Walker moved to Spain in March, they assumed that their savings could stay in the UK. But when the couple tried to open a savings account with Nationwide they were told they no longer qualified. "We've been with Nationwide for 40 years but it appears that counts for nothing when you leave the UK. It's very disappointing," Dan said. The Walkers, aged 76 and 78, are among a growing number of expats finding it harder to access their old banking services, or having their accounts closed altogether. While Nigel Farage and the like have raised awareness of how banks may shut down accounts of UK citizens, sometimes without explanation, it is Brexit that has caused huge problems for people choosing to live abroad. Thousands of British expats living in EU countries had their bank accounts closed last www.year.UK financial institutions previously used the EU's "passporting" system to provide services to expats who retained their British accounts. The rules enabled UK banks to provide services to customers living in the European Economic Area (EEA) - the EU plus Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway. Now, however, a bank needs separate authorisation in each EEA country where it operates. The Walkers sold their home in West Malling, Kent, this year and now live in a three-bedroom new-build in the village of Alcalali in the Valencia region. "We've been travelling to Spain for 20-odd years. We love the weather, wine and food and have friends living here," Dan said. The Walkers get their workplace pensions paid into their Nationwide current account while their state pension is paid into their Spanish bank, Sabadell, in euros. Nationwide allows customers to keep their savings and current accounts when they move abroad, but does not allow British citizens living overseas to open new accounts because of the additional legal and compliance aspects that are required. This means that the Walkers cannot open one of Nationwide's new savings accounts, which pay up to 5.5 per cent. Kay, who used to work in a bookshop, and Dan, who worked at Sainsbury's, have revoked their UK citizenship and are now Spanish citizens. This is to avoid post-Brexit rules which mean that you can only stay in the EU without a visa for up to 90 days in a 180-day period. Any trip longer than 90 days requires a visa and a residence permit. "We were saddened by Brexit as it curtailed some of our freedoms. We are also now finding it harder to access UK banking services," Dan said. The Walkers were eventually able to open a savings account paying 5 per cent with Skipton International, a subsidiary of Skipton Building Society, which has a licence in Guernsey. It has had a surge in British expats seeking better saving rates - 586 expats have opened accounts this year, compared with 189 for the whole of 2019. Jim Coupe from Skipton International said: "The impact of Brexit and changes in banking laws have caused more misery to British expats than has been realised. So many people have been cut off by the high street bank that they had thought of as reliable, and been left floundering in a country that, in many cases, is new to them." ? Moving abroad In 2017 almost 800,000 British expats live in the EU, excluding Ireland, according to the Office for National Statistics' latest figures. Most leading British banks have an international arm that can cater to expats, allowing them to save using different currencies. However, the accounts may come with a fee and savings rates may not be as generous because they are linked to the European Central Bank's rates (which vary depending on the type of lending) rather than the Bank of England's base rate. The European Central Bank's rates range from 3.75 per cent to 4.5 per cent, while the Bank rate here is 5.25 per cent and expected to rise again this year. Skipton International offers saving rates of up to 5.7 per cent on a two-year bond. The best two-year savings bond available here pays 6.1 per cent, from the online bank Recognise. While the UK arm of Santander pays 2.5 per cent on an easy-access account, Santander International pays nothing. When using an international bank, check whether your money is protected. The international arm of a bank is not typically covered by the Financial Service Compensation Scheme (FSCS) which protects up to £85,000 if your bank goes bust. The Skipton International account, for example, is covered up to £50,000 by a Guernsey deposit protection scheme. Some banks are covered by an EU deposit protection scheme, up to (EURO)100,000. If you open an Isa here then move abroad, you can't put any more money into it after the tax year in which you move (unless you're a Crown employee working overseas or their spouse or civil partner). You must tell your Isa company as soon as you stop being a UK resident, but you can keep your Isa open and will still get UK tax relief on your gains. We were saddened by Brexit - it's curtailed some of our freedom Graphic    Dan and Kay Walker live in Alcalali in Valencia and are now Spanish citizens Load-Date: August 19, 2023  End of Document
