   My recent Gibraltar trip was a stark reminder of the hell of a hard border Mail on Sunday (London) July 24, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: SPORT; Pg. 12 Length: 903 words Byline: DERMOT AHERN Body   THROUGHOUT the Brexit debacle, there was much commentary about the need to ensure that we did not go back to a hard border on this island. Even ardent Brexiteers accepted that the customs checks of yesteryear should remain a thing of the past. People like me - who lived all our lives in the shadow of the border - knew how adversely it affected our daily lives. Many others, who lived away from the border, didn't really appreciate the negative impact on border communities. Over the years, it often surprised me just how unaware some people were of the situation on the border. Indeed a UK friend of mine, as a recent first-time visitor to this area, couldn't believe how travel from Dublin to Belfast was so easy and seamless. Our joint membership of the European Union with the UK, and the burgeoning peace process, meant that a lot of the paraphernalia that had previously been on the border melted away. The week before last, I got a stark reminder of what life is like living close to a hard border. Along with approximately 300 other Dundalk Football Club supporters, I made my way through Malaga airport to Gibraltar, where our football team was pitted against a team from Gibraltar in the Europa Conference League. Horrendous Readers will remember that Gibraltar is regarded as an 'overseas territory' of the UK. Over the years, residents of Gibraltar have refused to break their ties with the UK. Despite this attitude, people there were very much anti-Brexit. But when the UK left the EU, so did Gibraltar. Meaning that there had to be customs and passport checks on the border with Spain. As we approached the border crossing, quite apart from grappling with the horrendous heat, we had to queue up with dozens of other cars and lorries trying to gain access to the Rock. We had been warned that on the previous day there had been a 90-minute delay at the border checkpoint. After approximately 40 minutes, we got to the top of the queue. Our passports were checked first by Spanish policemen and then, within just a few metres, by Gibraltar officials. This process was repeated in reverse on the following day when we were returning to Malaga. In the car, all of us remarked how difficult it must be for frequent travellers to and from the Rock, to have to put up with this imposition on a daily basis. It was a stark reminder to all of us of just how lucky we are that Brexit did not adversely affect our situation on our own border. As we know, there have been tortuous negotiations over the last few years to try to resolve the stand-off over Brexit. Suffice to say that, post the Boris Johnson era, there was a growing hope that relations between Westminster and Brussels would be on a better course. The Windsor Framework, which was agreed by Mr Johnson's successor Rishi Sunak with the EU, provided fresh hope that the matter would be put to bed. But standing in the way were Jeffrey Donaldson and his DUP. Despite most believing that Northern Ireland was getting the best of both worlds out of the agreement, the DUP has steadfastly refused to play ball. The local elections in the North have come and gone. But despite some optimism, Mr Donaldson's party remains unhappy with the agreement. The EU has stood off, leaving it to the British government to negotiate with the DUP leaders. Both have made it clear that there will be no renegotiation of the Windsor Framework. Last week, it was reported by the UK's Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Chris Heaton- Harris, that good progress had been made in discussions with the DUP. Mr Heaton-Harris had just completed a round of talks with party leaders in the North. Stagnant The aim is to get the Northern Assembly and Executive back in place. For months, senior civil servants have been running Stormont departments. The political scene has remained stagnant. The British government has made substantial cuts in the NI budget. And the vast majority of people in the North continue to be critical of the impasse. Meanwhile, the Republic is going from strength to strength. Apart from having record budget surpluses to look forward to, it has clearly been shown that the economy here is robust enough to handle any adverse effects flowing from Brexit. Indeed recent figures show that, if anything, while the UK is still heavily relying on the Republic for many of its imports, we are looking elsewhere for our imported goods. Exports from Ireland to Britain grew by 19% year on year, coming to 10% of our total exports worldwide. At the same time, we have become less reliant on the British market for imports. There was a 34% fall in imports from Britain last May, compared to the same month last year. And with impending new UK import controls due to be implemented at the end of October, we can expect even more disruption in trade between Britain and the Republic. Having got a strong feeling of déjà vu by seeing a very hard border between Spain and Gibraltar, I thank my lucky stars that the EU negotiators insisted on our behalf, from day one, that there cannot be a return to a hard border on the island of Ireland. That stance has provided stability in our dealings with the outside world - especially with our colleagues in the EU. It has also helped us to go our own way economically - and with confidence. And it has prevented us from returning to the bad old days of a divided island; from an economic, an infrastructural and a physical point of view. Graphic    Rock and a hard place: Dundalk played a Gibraltar team at the Europa Conference League in the UK 'overseas territory' Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
