   New work permit rules will reshape transfers for ever The Sunday Telegraph (London) June 18, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: SPORT;NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 1020 words Byline: Sam Wallace Body   The rush for South America has begun: Premier League clubs have finally secured from the Football Association the right to buy players from anywhere in the world, and the first place they are heading is the world's richest talentproduction region. The cities of Brazil, and beyond, as well as Africa and talent hotspots in Japan and South Korea - plus Europe's lower leagues - are now legitimate scouting grounds for England's biggest clubs, and those in the Football League. The face of the Premier League is about to change again. Clubs will be permitted two wild-card squad places for what the FA describes as "elite significant contribution players". The ESCPs are those who do not meet work permit regulations but have been identified as of sufficient ability to enrich the league. Up to two more ESCP wild cards will be granted, depending on how many minutes a club give to England-qualified players (EQPs). For the Premier League, and the Championship, it is the start of a new era. Some believe it will be the biggest change to recruitment in the Premier League's history. For footballers all over the world, it could be a golden ticket to the lucrative English game. For British clubs it could be a tangible Brexit benefit, a reorganising of trading norms that previously saw them pay a huge premium to European counterparts. But there are risks too. There is the possibility of talent stockpiling by the biggest clubs and, as ever, the concern is around the English footballer's place in this new world. The promise of a post-Brexit paradise of free trade never materialised for clubs after Britain left the European Union. Previously, clubs were able to sign boys from within the EU at 16, which led to the plundering of Barcelona's academy and others in the 2000s for the likes of Cesc Fabregas and Gerard Pique. But that privilege was lost with Brexit. The ESCP move comes at the end of long post-Brexit negotiations between the clubs and the FA, which holds the balance of power - the governing body endorsement (GBE) - as the authority tasked by the Home Office to draw up the work permit system. FA chief executive Mark Bellingham has made it his stated aim to protect the EQPs place in the system, and rightly so. Last week's agreement was a delicate compromise between loosening global trading restrictions while protecting the native footballer. Post-Brexit, GBE work permits have been awarded to overseas players through a system in which they accumulate points for minutes played in domestic leagues and national teams, with more points available the higher the standard of league and team. Clubs were permitted six under-21s who did not make the GBE threshold of 15 points. They would be passed on appeal and those such as Brighton and Sunderland, who studied the system, took advantage. But others argued they could not risk investing in major new scouting operations if they did not have certainty that their appeal at the FA's exemptions panel would pass. The 15-point GBE system also presented another fundamental problem: players who met the criteria were inevitably priced by their parent clubs at a level that was unaffordable for Championship teams, and many in the Premier League. For Championship clubs in particular it all but ruled out signings from other lower-tier leagues overseas. In 2014 Leicester City, a Championship club then as they are now, signed Riyad Mahrez from then Ligue 2 French club Le Havre for £450,000. Under current rules that would have been impossible. Mahrez would not have made the 15 GBE points. Now a 2023 equivalent talent could be signed by a Championship club as an ESCP. For the big clubs, the standard of player they sought was generally so high he would almost certainly meet the 15-point criteria. The ESCP option gives them a chance to sign raw talent cheap who, in a few years and with European league experience, might cost tens of millions more. Therein lies the big saving. Of the £1.9billion on fees the Premier League clubs spent in last summer's transfer window, £1.2billion was spent on players from European leagues. A significant number were non-EU nationals signed by clubs in European countries with a much more lenient work permit system. They acquired the talent, developed them and then sold them on at eye-watering levels of profit to the Premier League. Darwin Nunez, for example, joined Spanish club Almeria from his native Uruguay as a 20-yearold for about £4million. Last summer he left Benfica as Liverpool's record £85million signing. At 20, the Brazilian Antony left Sao Paulo for Ajax in a deal that was worth about £18million. He joined Manchester United last summer for £86million. In the future, clubs such as Liverpool and United will be able to sign some - if not all - of those players directly from South America. The FA hopes that by incentivising the development of EQPs - the players who will make up future England teams - it will balance the influx of global talent. This coming season will prove a fascinating insight into how that theory holds up. For the wealthiest, the search has already begun. Manchester City's Abu Dhabi owners recently added the Brazilian club EC Bahia to their City Football Group. By far the biggest of the 13 CFG clubs after City, EC Bahia will offer the Etihad recruitment team an insight into the Brazilian game few others enjoy. Like many others in the Premier League they looked at Endrick, the 16-year-old Brazilian prodigy at Palmeiras, who already has a deal to join Real Madrid from next year. The FA has struck a bold deal with the Premier League. This has been a golden age for English footballers who must be encouraged to bloom in the most competitive football league in the world. The losers? It will certainly be harder for European clubs who have traditionally bought players from South America and Africa and sold them on to top English clubs. IMAGES They might have complained about the Premier League's financial advantage over the years, but they have also benefited from its generous transfer fees. GETTY A post-Brexit paradise of free trade never materialised for clubs after Britain left EU Graphic    Elite imports: (From left) Riyad Mahrez, Darwin Nunez, Endrick and Antony Load-Date: June 18, 2023  End of Document
