   No Headline In Original Irish News August 17, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 The Irish News Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: A6F4 Length: 431 words Body   Brexit fantasies are now being superseded by unpalatable Brexit reality and reality bites hard. The UK government has again been forced to postpone plans to “take back control of our borders” because they simply don’t work. Two years into Brexit and the UK still has no customs regime in place for EU food imports. Jacob Rees-Mogg arrogantly and erroneously claimed that Brexit would reduce food costs by 20 per cent. However, it has become clear that – because the UK no longer recognises EU safety standards – red tape bureaucracy has actually increased food prices and significantly contributed to the inordinately high UK inflation figures. Sunak’s government is close to conceding that their hard-Brexit vision is fundamentally unworkable. All they can do is to mask their chronic incompetence by continually kicking the proverbial can (customs deadline) down the road. The lack of a customs regime is a potential public health risk. The UK is currently not checking anything that comes into the country from the EU. We also have the Windsor Framework fiasco. So much for “taking back control”. Mr Rees-Mogg will argue that the answer to this problem is to purchase cheaper food products from outside the EU. But this food is produced to significantly lower animal hygiene and welfare standards. US agriculture is based on industrial scale intensive farming. Carcasses are routinely sprayed with chlorine to avoid food poisoning. The substantially higher levels of food poisoning in the US than in Europe bear testimony to the poor sanitation in US farming. Do consumers really want this cheaper, contaminated and potentially toxic food? And, given the above health risks, these ‘cheap’ imports would generate additional customs checks and consequently costs. None of this would have happened if the UK had accepted the EU’s safety standards. It’s time for the government – and the opposition – to accept that the UK needs to find a new way forward. Realignment with EU standards seems the obvious solution. This arrangement would facilitate the import of higher quality food products from Europe at a reasonable price. Its a win, win situation. Polls show that Brexit regret is at an all-time high. They cannot be ignored. The public is allowed to change its mind – especially when it is clear that this hard Brexit is eroding the social, economic and political fabric of Britain. It may not be possible to rejoin the EU immediately. But the UK must escape from its democratic dystopia where both major parties seem trapped in a pernicious Brexit cul-de-sac. GEORGE WORKMAN Donabate, Dublin Load-Date: August 16, 2023  End of Document
