   No Headline In Original Stratford Herald August 31, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 Iliffe Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Length: 2084 words Byline: Stratford Newsdesk Body   Reservations about 123+ were correct CLLR SHENTON raises an interesting point about local democracy in his letter in the Herald of 17th August ('Green results were down to Blue policies') about the introduction of the 123+ waste service. I believe that the task of opposition is to ask tough questions and use expertise to enable the best outcome for our residents, but to do so in a professional manner. As leader of the opposition at the time, I made it clear that I supported the principles of the changes, including the collection of food waste. I also supported the materials recycling facility, which is a partnership project with other councils. My group raised valid questions about the implementation of the new scheme and the communications strategy. The job of opposition is to ask tough questions. We were not completely satisfied with the answers given, so we abstained on the vote. Our reservations proved to be correct in a number of areas, including the availability of food waste bins and unexpected changes by the contractor using crews unfamiliar with the area, particularly in the east of the district. In my professional opinion, having led a national waste and recycling management programme on behalf of the government, implementation can be the stumbling block with schemes such as the 123+ waste collection service. Effective communication with residents is a necessity and proper scrutiny is always needed on costs and implementation. I endorse the remarks of the portfolio holder, Cllr Lorraine Grocott, as reported in the original Herald article. The staff of both Stratford and Warwick district councils have been very professional and worked incredibly hard on the introduction of the new regime. They deserve our thanks for the success it has achieved in boosting recycling in the two districts and reducing the amount of waste going to landfill. Looking forward, the new Stratford administration intends to improve the 123+ service still further including by investigating how to address the concerns of those residents with medically related waste. Susan Juned Leader, Stratford District Council Government inhibits local planning I AM intrigued by Dominic Connolly's letters about the performance of Stratford District Council's planning  appeals record. Rather than focus on a part of the local system that actually works I wish he would concentrate his attention on the planning legacy left by the previous administration of the council which now gives us enormous challenges. In Stratford District we have built many thousands of new houses over the last 20 years increasing the population significantly. However only one new primary and no new secondary schools have been built, the number of hospital beds has actually decreased and there has been no significant investment in transport. A great example of the mismanagement is the current building of over 3,000 new houses at Lighthorne/Gaydon for which only a little over £30 million has been generated to provide, education, health, police, community, transport and any other services. This is wholly inadequate. To make matters even worse Conservatives have encouraged the creation of loopholes in planning controls such as 'custom and self-build' to facilitate the building of yet more housing without any contribution being made to infrastructure provision. Rather than provide new housing in the district to meet local needs ­- there is a desperate need for more one and two bed low-cost housing well served by transport and other facilities, the Conservatives have prompted "affordable housing" knowing that millionaires can "afford" four- and five-bedroom houses valued at half a million largely built on agricultural land that is no longer available for food production. They have also facilitated developers setting up "management companies" on new housing estates, causing many residents who thought they had bought freehold properties to pay an extra tax for the maintenance of their estate, that is completely uncontrolled. The new Liberal Democrat administration is determined to get planning back under control to the benefit of local residents. We will expose the ongoing duplicity such as how this Government is forcing us in Stratford District to build nearly 1,000 new houses each year on top of the large number we are generating on "windfall" sites, despite our need for sustainable development and not increase the carbon footprint. No Mr Connolly, planning appeals are not the problem in Stratford District, the biggest challenge we face is the constant stream of National Planning Policy Guidance emanating from Westminster, much of it contradictory and inhibiting us from addressing local needs and concerns. Cllr George Cowcher MRTPI Portfolio holder for planning and economic development,  Stratford District Council Need for  frankness over Brexit disaster TONY JEFFERSON'S letter in last week's Herald ('Prioritise economic growth') blames, in part, the years of "abysmal Gross Domestic Product (GDP)" on a triple whammy of the effects of the 2007 financial crisis, the Covid-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine. Tellingly, he omits the one word that is responsible for more long-term damage to our economy than all three of these put together, Brexit. The disastrous consequences of the UK's decision to leave the European Union are becoming clearer by the day. The UK's drop in GDP is at least three per cent greater than comparable countries, indicating that Brexit is the main driver of under-performance. This figure is almost equivalent to the total amount we spend on education. As well, we see how Brexit has led to increased barriers for business, the erosion of our health and environment protections and, not least, our inability as an isolated country to take control of our borders.  It is no surprise that we are now seeing the government being forced to respond to these consequences by backtracking, one-by-one, on all its Brexit promises. At the same time, we see the Government subtly trying to change the language of Brexit.  No more the promises of "no downsides, just upsides." Instead, ministers are attempting to gaslight the British public into believing we are to blame by telling us, "The people made the decision the leave the EU so now we have to make the best of it." We can only hope that a more honest and responsible government than the current one will start to have a frank conversation with the British public about the Brexit calamity and the urgent need to re-set our relationship with our nearest neighbours and friends across the Channel. Jonathan Baker Loxley Where's the  Lib Dem fairness? WE saw it once before, and we are seeing it again. The Liberal Democrats' talk of fairness and justice when they are not in a position to enact it but, just like the tuition fee fiasco, once they gain power they appear to be no different than the very Tories who Ed Davies says he opposes. They have gone ahead with introducing parking charges to the only free public car park in Stratford - a car park that has been free for as long as anyone can remember. Had they bothered to delay the installation in order to investigate, they would have realised that it is widely used by Stratford pensioners in their pursuit of a healthy body and mind. We are constantly told by the experts and Government alike that the benefits of time spent in the countryside, especially by the elderly, is a panacea for a healthy body and mind. We have been bombarded with advice that partaking in strenuous exercise like (wild swimming, boating, jogging, power walking and to a lesser extent angling) is beneficial to young and old alike. Yet, this new regime has decided to introduce a financial barrier that could deter many that most benefit from keeping fit. As previously stated, this car park has always been free, allowing rich or poor, young and old free unrestricted access to the countryside and the benefits it brings. I find it difficult to accept that introducing parking fees on this car park will make all but the smallest fiscal difference to Stratford's coffers. The Lib Dems have been magnanimous in telling us that we can park free of charge as long as it is on their terms. They have given a concession that will impact the least on maximising perceived revenues. They expect those of us who need a car to get there to do it at the most inconvenient time possible. Are they really unaware of the traffic problems that often occur on the Warwick, Evesham and Birmingham roads at the very time they propose? Many thousands of Stratford rate payers live outside walking distance so need a car to use it. Inclement weather has a great bearing on when people take their exercise or walk their dogs. By putting time constraints on free parking removes that flexibility. This concession is really only available for about half the year; between late October and March it would be too dark to benefit from the concession offered. If this new regime wants to prove they are different from the previous one they need to prove that they are prepared to listen and act when required. There will be some elderly residents whose only chance of interacting with others in what may be a very lonely existence is their daily walk at the Lench Meadows. Is this new regime really willing to remove that chance for a small bag of corn? Since the introduction of these charges I have not seen a single angler. A pastime that has gone on since Shakespeare was a lad has possibly gone forever. The revenue the council derived by leasing out the fishing rights is also likely to disappear. Come on, Lib Dems, show us you're different and either remove these parking machines altogether or give meaningful concessions for the residents of Stratford. P Hayes Bearley  Difficulties of reporting noisy vehicles I LISTENED with interest this week on the regional news station an item regarding the increase in complaints of noisy cars and motor bikes. In an area of Birmingham they have been using a pilot scheme which monitors and records the noise level to decide if action is needed to act on the complaints. I have on two occasions reported to the police a vehicle which since being stripped and rebuilt has a very noisy engine and exhaust and the owner takes great pleasure in starting up the vehicle in the evening before taking off down our road in excess of the speed limit. We also have a gentleman who owns a yellow noisy motorbike and must work shifts - we don't live next door but further down the road however when he starts the engine up it's like having him in our front room - may I add this is usually 10.25pm. What did the local police say? They have to be present to witness and hear the noise levels. As I sit here now on a rare sunny Sunday afternoon I can hear motorcycles and noisy cars travelling up the bypass and I live on the Clopton estate. I feel sorry for the elderly and neighbours who have to live next door to these people. It's bad enough hearing dogs continually barking in back gardens day and night  but to have noise pollution from vehicles and bikes as well is not pleasant. DBH Stratford-upon-Avon  Unjustified attacks I WAS sorry to see the report in last week's Herald  that Matthew Emerson has been attacked on social media for forming a new company following the liquidation of the former family business. Less than a fortnight after we heard of the problem, all of us who had contracts and had paid deposits received letters from him telling us that all would be honoured. Our new window was fitted on 22nd August, to the high standard we have come to expect from him and his staff. This is a thoroughly responsible way of dealing with such a problem and attacks are unjustified. Christine Penney Stratford-upon-Avon  Unnecessary evictions I SEE that a sign has been erected at Foundation House, in Masons Road, Stratford, offering it to be let. This seems strange after so many groups of huge importance to the town were summarily evicted just a few weeks ago. The owners clearly had no real plans for the building and the chances of it being taken for office use at the moment are so small as to be invisible. Peter Tandy Stratford-upon-Avon Godsend volunteers RECENTLY the Herald highlighted the role of volunteers in the foodbank. The role is also superbly filled in Stratford by the voluntary drivers who take us to medical appointments. I have had cause to use them on many occasions because of age and disability and now unable to drive they have been a godsend. Mrs E Cole, Stratford-upon-Avon Load-Date: May 28, 2024  End of Document
