   No Headline In Original The Medway Messenger June 13, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 Iliffe Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Length: 1965 words Byline: Robert Barman Body   By Robert Barman rbarman@thekmgroup.co.uk Car drivers are being ignored during campaign Over the next few weeks, the news is going to be dominated by politicians promising to conjure-up thousands of new doctors nurses, teachers, houses, etc, to cure our numerous 'crisis' problems. But no mention of the war on the driver. Is that to continue? No major political party is talking about changing the Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) mandate, despite the fact it is going to affect millions of families that cannot home-charge. Plus the cost of electric vehicles. What political party is going to admit that our neglected, dirty, potholed roads are of no interest to them and we must be made to feel 'guilty' for even wanting to drive. Walking, cycling or public transport (if it exists?) must be the only form of transport 'on offer' to meet our families' needs and of course the only way to 'Save The Planet', despite the fact that the aircraft/marine industries and the military can carry on using fossil fuel as usual and we have to rely on their 'goodwill' for any emission reductions! Also, not withstanding over 70% of the Earth's surface is covered in water, hence no cars. With the promised threat of more major vehicle restrictions taking priority on most manifestos, or car ownership being ignored altogether as if it did not exist, who is going to support the UK's 37 million driving licence holders/voters and their families? Terry Hudson Politics of envy bankrupted the country before Reading the letters from Ray Duff and John Cooper last week, one cannot help but wonder where they think all the money is coming from to pay for their wish list, as each failed to mention it. The former wants a universal basic income (presumably higher than the minimum levels already in place) and the rebuilding of our NHS and other public services.  Who is he expecting to pay for all of it? Non-doms perhaps? They might be extremely wealthy, but their contribution would still not come anywhere near what is required. Or perhaps he believes we should return to Labour's method that it tried back in the 1970s of taxing the rich to such a punitive extent our highest earners, including high profile figures in the film and entertainment industry, left the country for the USA and elsewhere, taking their potential earnings with them. The consequence of that politics of envy policy was that the smart money moved out, investment dried up and the late Denis Healey, Chancellor at the time, was forced to go to the IMF asking for a loan, which was granted, but only in return for him signing a letter of intent to cut public spending. As the country was effectively broke, to get its hands on the money, the Labour government had no choice but to comply. Public service workers who had been denied a meaningful pay rise for years began striking. That led to the winter of discontent and the eventual downfall of the Labour government. That also brought about the beginning of the tenure of the late Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister, so all those life-long Labour supporters who have always hated Mrs Thatcher and everything she stood for should lay the blame where it truly belongs - with the Labour government of the 1970s that bankrupted this country and brought about international humiliation. John Cooper asserts that he agrees with the Archbishop of Canterbury that the child benefit cap should be lifted beyond the first two, but doesn't say where it should be reset. Should it be four? Or six?  Or perhaps no cap at all so that irresponsible people can have more children than they can afford and become totally reliant on state handouts, paid for by hard-working taxpayers. If the Conservative Party's claim that under a future Labour government every working family will be paying at least £2,000 more in taxes is a lie, how does that government plan to fund any of its proposed policies if it does not intend to raise income tax, National Insurance or VAT? Labour must surely have hidden plans to introduce all manner of funding streams but by methods that are not commonly referred to as taxes. Otherwise, how is it as a government going to increase funding on anything without breaking the promises it has made? C. Aichgy PM's dereliction of duty at D-Day anniversary During the course of the 80th D-Day anniversary commemoration in Normandy, Rishi Sunak, the Prime Minister, met the British veterans in attendance as did President Biden meet American veterans. In the evening the President met with President Macron of France and the German Chancellor Schultz, standing together in unity and representing their countries. Britain, by contrast, in the absence of the Prime Minister was represented by Foreign Secretary, Lord Cameron, standing in for the PM who was back in Britain attending a general election-based interview. After the storm of criticism for his absence, Mr Sunak publicly apologised but the fact is that he is guilty of a dereliction of duty and let us all down. I have a feeling that this general election will be remembered as the one in which the leader of the governing party scuppered any chance of being returned to power because he paid only lip service to honouring those servicemen who did their duty. It is sobering to remember that 1,760 British soldiers died on D-Day and many more were injured. The significance of what they did, in starting the beginning of the end of the German tyranny of Europe which led to Allied victory and the end of the Second World War, is beyond compare.John Cooper Government has made small boats problem worse This paper has lots of letters about the small boats problem but few seem to ask why it is a problem? The answer is that it is a problem, one of many, that has been made massively worse by the Conservative government. They had already made it impossible to apply for asylum from most other countries, say Sudan or Gaza, and then with Brexit we lost the EU Treaty of Dublin power to return migrants to France and their first country of entry to the EU. This created an enormous vacuum which sucked in the people-smuggling gangs, as previously what was the point of paying thousands of pounds to cross the Channel if you could just be returned? Before Brexit small boat crossings were tiny, about 200 people a year. Since Brexit they have grown massively and this puts an enormous strain on Kent, which we are all paying for. So a very difficult problem has been created, but I can't see that the Rwanda policy, which reportedly treats 1% of the problem at a cost of £2 million per person removed, is ever going to be a proper solution. J. Hughes Brexit brought an end to live export cruelty As a protester against live exports  at Ramsgate and Dover, I am, along with my fellow protesters, delighted  we have, after decades of campaigning, a total ban on this extremely cruel trade, with the King's assent being received. Brexit made this humane action possible, for the European Union prevented the banning of live exports as it was not legal to stop the free movement of farm animals which, under EU ruling, are considered "goods". When an assignment of sheep arrived in such a poor state at Ramsgate Port in 2012, the RSPCA had to humanely euthanise them on the spot, Thanet District Council then imposed a temporary ban for five weeks in the hope this would end this dreadful trade. Instead, they were fined millions for contravening the EU free movement of goods ruling.Kent Action Against Live Exports (KAALE) spearheaded the campaign from 1995 after Jill Phipps, a live exports protester was killed under the wheels of an exporter's lorry at Coventry Airport. Grateful thanks should be given to KAALE who campaigned relentlessly and with great determination and to all those who gave support by attending demonstrations, resulting in much future animal suffering being prevented. Vivien Clifford Spending £20m on council HQ is 'deluded' Medway Council will borrow £20 million to tackle the RAAC problem at the Gun Wharf building and carry out its refurbishment. Whilst Cllr Naushabah Khan insists the council does everything it can to "do the right thing for the public in Medway" and Cllr Teresa Murray appears to think the public "understand and support such action". I fear they are seriously deluded! I suspect the public might consider £20m be better spent in the following ways. The list is by no means exhaustive, but items on it would benefit many in Medway: - Use £3.5m to fix the lock gates at Chatham Port so we can secure the future of Chatham Docks, so saving 800 skilled jobs, many genuine apprenticeship opportunities and the last remaining working vestige of Medway's maritime history. The present Labour council promised to save the docks when running for election last May. They have reneged on that promise. - Use a substantial amount to fix the atrocious potholed roads all over Medway. The roads are quite simply seriously dangerous. Improving the roads would definitely save the public a fortune in vehicle repairs. The council is quick to advocate the idea of ANPR cameras and paint red lines all over Medway (both money-making schemes) but not so quick to use that revenue for quality road maintenance. - Re-instate free swimming for under 16s and over 60s, surely benefitting both physical and mental health? In the long term, benefitting our NHS. The newly-opened Cozenton Park is overpriced and will not be accessible to most Medway families. - Begin to do something about the eyesore which is The Pentagon. I hear it is now owned by the council so why not move council offices into that building and allow developers to purchase Gun Wharf? The Pentagon has always been a white elephant - always half empty and not used to full capacity. The previous bus depot that has been languishing empty for years could serve as parking for employees. - Employ suitably qualified and adequate personnel in the planning department to follow up developers' plans and their building work to ensure they are producing the schemes they promise to create. Using Lordswood Lane as just one example: land was purchased, the community was promised eight affordable homes for local people, a new shop (which the community did not need) and underground parking. Five years later, the emergency services attend intermittently to combat anti-social behaviour in the underground car park, the 'shop' remains a pipe dream and is all boarded up, there are no ridge tiles on the building and a ladder remains on the roof, the flats have been sold as a job lot and I understand have been allocated to tenants awaiting asylum claims. The original developer has moved on to his next project. Shocking. Entirely preventable. No affordable homes for local people.When local councils consistently fail to listen to local people and continue to use their council tax money in questionable ways, then perhaps, borrowing £20m might be more palatable to those of us who will be paying it back in future council tax payments. Maureen Crombie Glider's 'splash- landing' in pond recalled I left school at age 14 in April 1944 and started work at Shorts Bros Airport as a rivet boy. I was cycling to work at 6.45am when I saw a glider Hadrian Waco coming down to land at Rochester coming down very fast. The glider had broken its tow from a 'Stirling Bomber' and was in trouble. Inside  were four soldiers and a jeep in the nose. The glider hurtled across the runway, bounced over the Chatham Maidstone Road and aimed at Fort Horsted Farm House. At that time there was a dew pond in the farm garden. The glider went straight in, splash. The occupants looked aghast. I smiled and waved to them. 'Wow, I thought'. That Hadrian Waco was mainly wooden, bamboo and a lift-up nose canopy. One vehicle, four crew, all safe. That mishap could have saved their lives. Stephen Foy, 94 Chatham Load-Date: July 15, 2024  End of Document
