   No Headline In Original Bishop's Stortford Independent June 12, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 Iliffe Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Length: 939 words Byline: Bishop's Stortford Independent reporter Body   By Bishop's Stortford Independent reporter newsdesk@bishopsstortfordindependent.co.uk McDonald's will profit at the expense of our children's heath I write with great concern, as a parent and NHS worker, about the proposed development of a McDonald's restaurant/drive thru near the new Bishop's Stortford High School site. McDonald's will be conveniently located at less than a five-minute walk from the school; obviously, a safe crossing and walkway through to the development makes this even easier for pupils to access. The housing development in which the new school sits was once fields. So, East Herts Council has already agreed that we should remove an environment conducive to physical activity. Now a food outlet that serves energy-dense, nutrient-poor food to assist us on our way to greater levels of obesity and its consequences is being proposed. Furthermore, the proposed location is close to a school site. McDonald's will argue that it is good for the local economy or that it is investing in local community projects as part of its corporate responsibility narrative. However, never forget companies like McDonald's are motivated only by making a profit. This will be at the expense of our children's health. The consequences of ultra-processed food - like obesity, diabetes, cancer (the list goes on) - are created by companies like McDonald's. However, it is not them who will pay for these consequences. Instead it will be us who pay, both in terms of our health and in our taxes to fund the NHS care that will be needed. No doubt people will argue that individuals can make their own decisions. However, remember, these are children, and allowing McDonald's to build a drive thru will create an environment that promotes unhealthy decision-making. This proposed development is not consistent with Hertfordshire's public health strategy and I hope to see a robust objection to this plan by Hertfordshire's public health team. We must protect our children who inevitably will choose to go there. Name supplied Marson's lies in arguing for Brexit I would like to applaud the Stortford Indie for seeking the election candidates' opinions on key issues, in particular on the impact of Brexit last week. Of all the Government's actions over the past 14 years, Brexit will have the longest lasting impact, but it was hardly mentioned in the two television debates so far. As a Remain voter, I hope and believe that we shall eventually rejoin the EU. However, I accept that this will take much time, and can only be achieved with the clear consent of the people, as proposed by Helen Campbell, the Lib Dem candidate. Labour's policies on Brexit seem similar to those of the Conservatives, but claiming to be able to negotiate a better deal with the EU. Their candidate, Josh Dean, accepts that Brexit has not been a success. To argue that Brexit has been a success, Julie Marson, our Conservative candidate, has resorted to lies. She stated: "Since our departure from the EU, our economy has grown at a faster rate than Japan, Germany and Italy." This is not true. We left the EU on January 31, 2020. Since then, GDP growth in Japan and Italy has been greater, and among the G7, only Germany has grown more slowly, probably because the impact of sanctions against Russia was much greater there. Julie Marson also suggested that leaving the EU was critical for our roll-out of Covid vaccines. Again, not true: EU legislation, when we were a member, allowed us to follow a different roll-out. Indeed, Hungary went its own way, choosing to use the Russian vaccine. Honesty in politics is crucial in a democracy. Andy Chapman Hertford Make me your MP and I will meet you all As the Reform UK party parliamentary candidate for North West Essex, I want to reach out and apologise to each and every one of you. Rishi Sunak called the election for July 4, knowing full well that myself and all the other candidates in Reform UK would struggle to canvas and introduce ourselves to around 45,000 electors in our respective constituencies. I make this pledge to you all that if I am elected I will play catch-up and meet you all over the next four years. Please look out for my election leaflet that will come through letterboxes from this week and please visit our website at www.reformparty.uk/policies to read our Contract with the People. If you like what you read, please vote for us; if you don't, then vote for the party that best aligns with your beliefs. If you vote for the lesser of two evils, it is a wasted vote! If you want to know a bit more about me, my page is at My best wishes to you all and may you get the result you wish for on July 4. Grant StClair-Armstrong Reform UK candidatefor North West Essex M11 works: 'Over time and over budget' Is it just me or does anyone else think the M11 junction 8 and A120 Birchanger junction work is a complete and utter waste of taxpayers' money? I have lived in this neck of the woods for the best part of 50 years and I rarely saw any problems with the previous road layout, but common sense tells me this is going to be a disaster. If there's a queue from the Homebase roundabout due to an accident, for instance, and you are stuck in that queue trying to get to the M11, how many times will the lights change before you actually get to the M11 and how long will it take you? It's OK to say the lights will be monitored from a control room, but what happens when all the other roads are at a standstill too? And how many weeks will it be before traffic cones are erected again to do other work? The slogan is "Under time, under budget", NOT "Over time, over budget". Maurice Bardon Foxley Drive, Bishop's Stortford Load-Date: July 15, 2024  End of Document
