   No10 blasts senior doctors for plan to carry out private work on strike days Mail on Sunday (London) June 30, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 792 words Byline: Martin Beckford Body   DOWNING Street has blasted hospital consultants planning to put 'profit before patients' by carrying on with their lucrative private work while on strike. The Prime Minister's spokesman said it 'cannot be right' that senior doctors continue to treat their fee-paying patients at the same time as NHS procedures are cancelled during next month's two-day walkout. No10 spoke out yesterday after it was revealed that the wealthy medics, who earn £128,000 on average for their public sector work, are allowed by their union to continue in private practice even when they are taking industrial action. Asked what Rishi Sunak made of their behaviour, the PM's official spokesman replied: 'If consultants choose to take strike action, it cannot be right that some continue to only treat their fee-paying private patients and benefit financially from that while patient care is put at risk in the NHS. 'We would urge those consultants considering this approach to seriously consider the impact on the NHS. It would not be right to put profit before patients.' Up to 24,000 hospital consultants are due to strike on July 20 and 21, for the first time in more than a decade, claiming their incomes have fallen by 35 per cent in the past 15 years. They will provide 'Christmas Day cover', meaning that routine operations will be cancelled but life-ordeath services in A&E and maternity will remain in place. The action has been timed to start the day after junior doctors in England complete a five-day walkout, adding to the disruption suffered by patients. It comes after the head of the British Medical Association warned that all four types of doctors could be in dispute with the Government ahead of the next election. Professor Philip Banfield said GPs and specialist doctors may join in the rows over pay and conditions. Specialists say the value of their pay has fallen by 25 per cent since 2008 while GPs are angry about a new contract being imposed on them. 'What you could have is a situation where junior doctors, consultants, specialist and speciality doctors, and GPs are all in dispute with the Government in the runup to a general election,' Professor Banfield told The Guardian. 'That is what we are planning for.' Industrial action across the NHS risks the PM's key pledge to cut waiting lists, with a record 7.4million patients now waiting to start hospital treatment. Dissatisfaction over pay in the health service has continued alongside poor mental health among staff. Figures show that burnout and other mental health issues have remained the main cause of sick days. Data from NHS Digital shows 24.6 per cent of staff sickness absences in NHS England were down to anxiety, stress, depression and other psychiatric illnesses in February. The overall absence rate that month was 5 per cent, down from 5.3 per cent in January and 6.3 per cent in December. Separate analysis from the Nuffield Trust think-tank found that the average rate of sickness absences in NHS England in 2022 was 5.6 per cent, compared with 4.3 per cent in 2019, the year before the pandemic. The researchers claim this equates to the loss of 75,000 staff, an increase of 29 per cent over three years. It said ambulance staff, ambulance support staff and midwives had the largest rises in sick days in 2022 compared with 2019. Dr Billy Palmer, a senior fellow at the Nuffield Trust, said: 'The increasing numbers taking time away from work feeds into a seemingly unsustainable cycle of increased work leading to burnout and then more people choosing to leave. There has been a lot of focus on recruitment... but we need more endeavour to improve the working conditions of existing staff and protect them from illness.' Top consultant's jibes at Brexit and the Tories A SENIOR doctor behind NHS strike action appeared to refer to Brexit voters as racist and accused the Conservatives of 'enabling pond life'. Mike Henley, the deputy chairman of the British Medical Association's consultants committee, made the remarks as part of a debate on Twitter. He wrote: 'In the same way that Brexit enabled racists, the Tory leadership contenders falling over themselves to "wage war on woke" is enabling another section of pond life.' He also said the UK had been 'manipulated into Brexit by Russian influence and money to destabilise Europe'. Tory MP Ben Bradley called the Derby-based surgeon's comments 'utterly disgraceful'. Fellow Tory Paul Bristow, who sits on the Commons health committee, accused the BMA of being 'more interested in knocking the Government than getting a fair and reasonable pay award'. The BMA claimed Dr Henley's comments, made last year, were not calling Brexit voters racist or saying Tories were 'pond life'. 'Earning £128,000 for NHS work' 'Burnout a main cause of sick days' Graphic    From yesterday's Daily Mail Load-Date: June 30, 2023  End of Document
