   Nuclear test veterans' wait for medal continues Aberdeen Press and Journal July 22, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 50 Length: 897 words Byline: Struan Nimmo Body   Sir, - On November 21 last year, at the National Memorial Arboretum, during a service to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the start of the United Kingdom's nuclear weapons testing programme, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak announced to the assembled congregation the creation of a new medal, the Nuclear Test Medal, which had been approved by His Majesty the King. This medal, he said, would recognise and commemorate the service to the nation by participants in the UK's nuclear testing programme. When the nuclear tests' veterans and their families heard this announcement they were elated and hoped that they would soon be issued with their medal so that they could wear it during this year's Remembrance Day parades across the country, especially as this year's could be the last one for many of the veterans due to their average age now being 85 years. Since the announcement there has been very little progress over the medal. A number of MPs, including my own, have asked questions about when it will finally be issued. At first they were told by summer time. This was changed to late summer and now it is some time in the autumn. While, in an answer to one question, a date of November 22 was given. The government has claimed there are no delays in issuing this medal and that there is a long-established design, approval and manufacturing process. If there is a well-established process, you would expect that the medal could be produced and issued in a shorter timescale than the one offered by the government. When asked they are unable to suggest any reasonable cause for the delay, and only keep changing the final date. Colin Moir, Peterhead. Forgotten world of monologuists Sir, - I am researching the forgotten world of the Scottish Monologuists (1890-1950). Several had a close association with Aberdeen and the Highlands, and some spoke the Doric to great effect: Nell Greig, George Hutchison, Mary B MacLean and Dufton Scott. Hutchison appears to have led a busy life, running a marine engineering business (Marine Brass Works, 6-10 Chapel Lane) while being one of the first to broadcast on the BBC in 1921 from Aberdeen. He performed all over the north through the 1920s and 1930s, and journeyed to London to make several 78rpm records for Parlophone in 1931. If you have any knowledge of these artistes, or original 78rpm records, I will be delighted to hear from you. Contact details can be found at www.rongeesin.com Ron Geesin, Heathfield, East Sussex. Reality proves Brexit disaster Sir, - The intellectual bankruptcy of Brexit continues to confound. Who needs experts? George Emslie (Letters, July 17) delivers another inaccurate and nonsensical mishmash. Facts never impinge on beliefs: provocative hyperbole preferred to pragmatism. We got "Brexit done" but still await the spoils. An impatient Mr Emslie blames a "wily" EU! Realising there are no sunlit uplands the electorate has come to its senses, with 57% of those surveyed by YouGov now saying that leaving the EU was wrong. Tory Tobias Elwood, asserts: "We must admit Brexit is a mistake and rejoin the single market". Joining the CPTPP will have a minimal impact. Will there ever be a trade deal with the US? Britain accounts for 2% of global manufacturing and 2% of global R&D. We're not a superpower! Professor David Edgerton postulates "the good thing about Brexit was that it would destroy national illusions", advising "the UK needs a politics of modesty." A welcome contrast to the chest-beating stridency exhibited by Brexiteers. Mr Emslie blames the EU for the Illegal Immigration Migration Bill not working, oblivious of France's offer to open a processing centre. Is he unaware both France and Germany take more asylum seekers than Britain? Brexiteer George Eustace admits Britain needs more EU workers to ease labour shortages. Mr Emslie, it's time to confront reality. Ian D McCormick, Aboyne. Can we have an A96 campaign? Sir, - It was great to see your campaign for the A9 in The Press and Journal. Is the A96 Aberdeen to Inverness not just as important for the residents and your readers in Grampian? We were also promised a dual carriageway this decade. Possibly an article with a similar draft letter would be appropriate. A two-pronged attack to identify the failure of our government to support the people of Scotland north of the Central Belt. David Hekelaar, Gatehouse. George Street now in Third World Sir, - As a former "George Street loon" I felt compelled to comment on Susy Macaulay's excellent article (P&J, July 17). George Street was a fabulous shopping area with shops that sold everything and anything that you could possibly want. Just look at it now. If you want a haircut or a tattoo then George Street is the place to go - anything else then forget it. The street is like something out of a Third World country - and that is probably being unfair to our relatives and friends living in the Third World. The Oil Capital of Europe? Please, give me a break. George Scott, Aberdeen. Standards fall at Wimbledon Sir, - I can only agree with E Barton's letter (July 19). The displays of triumphalism and gamesmanship are beginning to render some of the Wimbledon tennis disagreeable to watch. There have been many wise words regarding success and failure, too many to mention here. Without mentioning names, those players concerned would do well to familiarise themselves with at least some of them. Jack Ward, Banchory. Load-Date: July 22, 2023  End of Document
