   Only a quarter in Republic think there will be a united Ireland in next decade; Twice as many in North believe united Ireland will happen in 10 years Irish Independent July 3, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 16 Length: 663 words Byline: JOHN DOWNING Body   Just one in four people in the Irish Republic believes there will be a united Ireland within the next 10 years - but almost twice that number north of the Border believe it will happen in that timeframe, a new survey today reveals. Two major opinion polls were run at the same time in both jurisdictions to examine attitudes of Irish people north and south to a range of issues mainly focused on the entire island's EU status seven years after the Brexit referendum. The poll found that only 24pc of people in the Republic believe there will be a united Ireland in the EU within 10 years. But almost half of those surveyed in Northern Ireland - or 45pc - believe unity will happen within a decade. Findings in the Republic showed a marked increase in just one year in the number of people who do not believe a united Ireland can happen inside a decade. It is up from 43pc last year to 58pc now and reverses a three-year trend of positive responses which had seen about one-third of people saying they believed there would be a united Ireland within the EU. The findings come in a rare all-island EU poll commissioned by the European Movement Ireland. The survey south of the Border was done by Amarách Research while the fieldwork in the North was done by polling firm Lucid Talk, with 1,200 interviews carried out in each of the two jurisdictions from June 2 to June 5. Support for Ireland remaining a member of the European Union remains stable and overwhelmingly positive at 88pc in the Republic while 79pc support membership in Northern Ireland. But there is a marked increase in numbers who believe the EU is "going in the wrong direction". The poll examines public opinion about EU issues in the North as the effects of the 2016 decision by UK voters to quit the bloc increasingly kick in. The questions, put north and south of the Border, were largely the same. But interviews in the North factored in whether the respondents voted 'Leave' or 'Remain' in that referendum. While the overall UK result was 52pc to 48pc in favour of Leave - a majority of 56pc backed Remain in Northern Ireland. Now in Northern Ireland 71pc of people, who say they voted Leave, support Ireland remaining a member of the EU. Findings also show that a majority, 66pc, of people in Northern Ireland believe the region is doing worse since Brexit, while over half of people in the Republic believe so. A large majority of 64pc of respondents who say they voted Leave in the Brexit referendum believe Northern Ireland is now faring worse. With new European Parliament elections due in June of next year, the Brexit effect of the North losing its three MEPs is also explored. The survey found almost three-quarters of people in Northern Ireland, or 74pc, against 51pc in the Republic believe that Northern Ireland should be represented in the European Parliament. This could revive calls for some of the Republic's quota of seats to be assigned to the North. Given the controversy generated by last week's government Consultative Forum on International Security Policy, it is notable that 49pc of respondents in the Republic believe Ireland should be part of increased EU defence and security co-operation. This is a drop of 10 points on last year, suggesting increased resistance to changing military neutrality. Those aged over 55 are most likely to favour increased defence participation. Noelle O Connell, who heads European Movement Ireland, said this is the 10th annual opinion poll on Irish EU attitudes but a first for surveying in the North. "Since Brexit, the relationship between people in Northern Ireland and the European Union has been uncertain, and we think it's important to measure public sentiment towards the major issues affecting the relationship between the European Union and this island," she said. She also noted that while support for Ireland remaining in the EU is stable and overwhelmingly positive at 88pc, in the Republic just 58pc believe the EU is moving in the right direction. Graphic    A puffin with a feast of sand eels on Great Saltee Island, Co Wexford. Photo: Corina Fitzsimons Load-Date: July 3, 2023  End of Document
