   Over 36,000 South Lanarkshire households to be hit by mortgage increases dailyrecord.co.uk July 11, 2023 Tuesday 7:50 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: IN YOUR AREA,LANARKSHIRE LIVE; Version:1 Length: 561 words Byline: By Billy Gaddi Highlight: New statistics released by the Labour party show how many households in South Lanarkshire are set to be affected by mortgage increases. Body   New figures show that 36,900 households in South Lanarkshire will be hit by mortgage increases. The stats, revealed by Labour, show that there could be an average rise of £170 per month on mortgages across the region. Across Scotland, 546,600 households will be paying an average of £190 more a month on their mortgages next year, according to the numbers. Labour's Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves spoke to Lanarkshire Live when she visited Rutherglen, and said: "Across Scotland, families are being hit hard by the toxic combination of a Tory mortgage bombshell and an incompetent SNP distracted by scandal. "Unlike both these governments, Labour will not stand by while Scots face the reality of those failures. "Not only has their economic recklessness driven this crisis, but this Tory government's failure to make its measures mandatory leaves households across Scotland missing out on the mortgage support they need. "Labour's mandatory plan and our Mortgage Rescue Scheme to ease the Tory mortgage bombshell offers Scottish families practical help now, while our commitment to fiscal responsibility and growth will secure our economy for the future. "If you look at the numbers for South Lanarkshire, thousands of people will be affected by the Tory mortgage bombshell. Dad of terminally ill Scots boy begs health chiefs for radical foreign treatment Prized snooker table where Sir Alex Ferguson racked up football deals goes up for sale "That's why I have said that the scheme for mortgage lenders should be mandatory not voluntary, so that everybody being affected by the Tory mortgage bombshell can extend the term or move to an interest only deal without worrying if their lender has signed up. "This is a crisis brought on by Tory mismanagement, but the SNP have no answers on the cost of living challenges and the extreme pressures public services are under either." In response, the SNP's economy spokesperson, Stewart Hosie MP said: "Mortgage rates rises are a direct result of the UK economic collapse created by the Tories, and are being compounded every day by the damage of the Brexit that Keir Starmer supports. Lanarkshire dance school jubilation as three youngsters win bronze for Scotland at Dance World Cup Lanarkshire P7 pupil convinces legendary DJ George Bowie to play at leavers' prom "Mortgage holders are being hammered by a Tory mortgage premium and the deep damage of Brexit. There is a reason why interest rates and inflation are significantly lower across the EU than in the UK, and one of the main reasons is Brexit. "If Brexit-backing Labour can't even be upfront with people about what's causing such economic harm to mortgage holders across the country, how can they be trusted to fix it? "Westminster parties are failing ordinary people who are being made to pay a heavy price for mistakes made by governments in London they don't elect. "The only solution to the cost of living crisis, and the economic chaos created by the damaging Brexit project, is Scotland being free from Westminster control with the full powers of independence." The Conservative Party was contacted for comment. * Don't miss the latest headlines from around Lanarkshire. Sign up to our newsletters. And did you knowLanarkshire Livehad its own app? Download yours for freehere. Lanarkshire rape survivor vows not to be silenced by vile 'beast' who attacked her whilst pregnant Load-Date: July 11, 2023  End of Document
