   Political chaos in Britain: Boris Johnson's resignation from his seat fuels war in his party CE Noticias Financieras English June 10, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 897 words Body   Former British Prime Minister Boris Johnson resigned "with immediate effect" Friday night as an MP. He wanted to get a head start because he was going to be expelled by his peers on the Privileges Committee on charges that he had lied about his banned social activities during Covid. His atom bomb made two slogans clear: that he was not going to accept the committee's verdict or have his honors list for the House of Lords censured. He preferred to leave thunderously rather than be humiliatingly kicked out of the House of Commons. His Conservative party is going to generate an election in his constituency. But this Saturday two other MPs allied to Boris who have resigned "immediately", launching new elections and risking the Torys seats.  A reflection of the civil war that has broken out in the Conservative party between pro Boris and anti Boris, pro Brexit and anti Brexit, when the general election could be any day now. Nadine Dorries, an MP who was rejected from Boris's honors list for the House of Lords and his most vocal supporter, resigned. But at noon on Saturday another of his allies resigned, "with immediate effect". Nigel Adams MP left his constituency of Selby and Ainsty. Yet another election on the doorstep.  The famous Eurosceptic Bill Cash announced this Saturday his retirement as an MP, after 40 years in Parliament. He will not stand in the next election. Boris promoted him in his honors list and he will now go to the House of Lords. These departures are forcing Labour and the Liberal Democrats to unite to face these replacement elections for departing Torys MPs. The idea is that where one can win, the other party will not stand. "Hasta la vista" again?  Boris Johnson's farewell last night sounded more like his famous, Terminator-esque line, "Hasta la vista," when he resigned as premier in the House of Commons than the end of his political career. Johnson resigned as an MP. But he made it very clear in his statement that he does not see this as the end of his political career. "So long" then, again. In an attack on his critics, the former prime minister said he was "baffled and appalled" at being "undemocratically" ousted by a committee that was guilty of "appalling bias." But it is not the end. "It's very sad to leave Parliament. At least for now," he said. The art of resuscitation Boris is always Boris and has the art of resuscitating. As a politician or a newspaper columnist-although his beloved Telegraph is for sale-or a magazine editor, as he was once editor-in-chief of The Spectator.  He will always be a threat from wherever he is to the prime minister in power. His colleague and former minister Rishi Sunak will not have easy days with this sniper with no morals whatsoever. Boris's allies suggested that his return "could come sooner rather than later". He might even try to stay in Mid Bedfordshire, the seat vacated by his biggest supporter, Nadine Dorries MP. She resigned on Friday, after being blocked for a peerage in Johnson's resignation honor roll by Downing St. James's. She has also been seen in Henley, her aristocratic and very Tory former constituency, and whose MP John Howell will stand down at the next election. Brexit, faded But Johnson's hopes of an early return to Parliament may be limited, at least while Rishi Sunak is in charge.  The allure of Brexit has faded, the British want to return to the European Union in some linkage formula. Boris's anti-European ideas are not today followed by the Conservatives as a whole. Any attempt to run in Mid Bedfordshire, or indeed any other seat, would need the approval of Conservative Central Office. Ultimately from Sunak, and that is highly unlikely to happen. There is very little sympathy in Downing Street or among most cabinet ministers for Johnson's tribulations, his morals and his lies. Many of his peers will breathe a sigh of relief to see the back of him. "It's all very well for Boris to complain about how unfair the process has been," a senior Conservative said Friday night. "But this whole process was set up when he was prime minister and he approved every aspect. "It's all very well accusing them of conducting a witch hunt, now that they have ruled against him. But if he thought the process was unfair or that the parliamentarians on the committee would be biased, why didn't he raise that at the time?" he wondered. Risks for Boris Johnson's successor. If Johnson has no immediate path to a political comeback, that does not make him any less dangerous to his successor. In his statement, he made clear that his anger goes far beyond the MPs on the Privileges Committee. It is directed at Sunak himself, whom he is going to muddy and force him to present his agendas during Covid's term, as they did with him. He can be punished like Boris. He also used his statement to condemn what he sees as Sunak's betrayal of the policies he championed in government, with a warning that the party will be punished at the polls for abandoning Brexit.  "Just a few years after winning the biggest majority in nearly half a century, that majority is now clearly at risk," Boris said . "We should not be afraid to be a properly Conservative government. We need to deliver on the 2019 manifesto, which was backed by 14 million people," he intimated them. Boris Johnson not only has no intention of going quietly, he has no intention of staying quiet. Paris, correspondent CB Load-Date: June 11, 2023  End of Document
