   Political and social crisis: is Great Britain heading for early elections? CE Noticias Financieras English June 12, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1345 words Body   Great Britain is heading for an early general election, in the midst of an unparalleled political and social crisis. A series of political events make up a disturbing panorama, in a country where the military are turning to the "food banks" because their salaries are not enough to buy food, in the face of the escalating cost of living. Brexit has entered into crisis with its own voters.  Boris Johnson's departure as an MP, First Minister Rishi Sunak's statement that Boris had asked him for things he does not consider "legally acceptable", and the arrest and release but continuing corruption investigation of former nationalist and pro-independence Scottish Prime Minister Nicola Sturgeon reflect a political chaos rarely seen in the post-Brexit kingdom. Former Prime Minister Boris Johnson decided to resign on Friday night, not to accept the guilt of a verdict of the parliamentary Privileges committee, which judged his conduct on Covid and suspended him 20 days in office. The end of his political career was not to be decided by his peers but by him. Boris left with another "Hasta la vista" and left his conservative party in civil war, divided between pro and anti Boris. Boris against all  The official sentence of the Committee will probably be known tonight. But Boris is no longer an MP.  The performance of the Committee is worrying. It was to function as investigator, prosecutor and judge but had no lawyers who could establish Boris Johnson' s defense.  The former Tory premier called it an "illegal tribunal", at the time he immediately resigned his seat as a legislator. He also doubted who had cut his honors list, the usual legacy of every prime minister, and accused Rishi Sunak, his successor at Downing St, of having interfered. His departure will trigger an election in his constituency and he was joined by the resignation of two of his loyal legislators. Two more elections, which may destabilize the weakened Tories. But he intends to carry Prime Minister Rishi Sunak in his downfall.  Over the weekend, Boris' allies accused the government of wanting to abandon Brexit and forget that 14 million Britons voted for it. But many Tory ministers want to consider Boris part of the past. Sunak's response  This morning British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak hit back.  Amid questions about artificial intelligence and technology, Rishi Sunak was also asked about Boris Johnson and the controversy surrounding his honors list. Sunak was asked at London Tech Week. There was a rather awkward pause, amid laughter and applause from the audience. Sunak said, "Boris Johnson asked me to do something I wasn't prepared to do because I didn't think it was right. That was overruling the Holac committee's decision or making promises to people." . "I wasn't prepared to do that. Like I said, I didn't think it was right." "When I got this job, I said I was going to do things differently because I wanted to change the policy, and that's what I'm doing," the premier replied.  The House of Lords Appointments Committee (Holac) revealed this weekend that it did not support eight of Boris Johnson's nominations . The Conservative psychodrama continued. It came in furious response from Boris Johnson, after his morning jog in his new millionaire's manoir in Oxfordshire.  Former Prime Minister Johnson accused his successor of "talking nonsense".  Former Conservative Party chairman Jake Berry has blamed the "establishment" for forcing former Prime Minister Johnson out of parliament.  Recently, the former Tory party chairman also blamed the "establishment " for trying to block Brexit. "People voted for Brexit and the "establishment" tried to block it. I stand by that. That was definitely my experience working as a minister in Theresa May's government. And the establishment has seen Boris walk out the door," he told Sky News. Election?  Sunak has until Jan. 28, 2025, to call an election in the kingdom. But Sir Keir Starmer, the opposition Labor leader, believes the state of the country demands early elections now.  "This farce must end. Citizens have had enough," he said on his Twitter account. He was backed by the Liberal Democrats. Polls give Labour a huge lead, even bigger than Tony Blair's 1997 lead if the election were held now.  The latest IPSOS polls give 44 percent to Labour, 28 percent to the Conservatives, 13 percent to the Liberal Democrats, 6 percent to the Greens and 8 percent to others if the election were now. Scotland is as shocked as Westminster is in the kingdom. Police arrested its pro-independence, pro-European former first minister Nicola Sturgeon yesterday. She was released seven hours later on Sunday after questioning. A corruption investigation into her nationalist party (SNP) for funding the independence referendum continues but she is not on trial.  Nicola Sturgeon said she was "shocked" and "deeply distressed" after being arrested and questioned for seven hours by police. The investigation began after receiving multiple complaints about the use of around £600,000 in donations to the SNP to organize a second independence referendum.  Sturgeon's arrest on Sunday caused further turmoil in the SNP. Labour is increasingly confident that the scandal will cause the nationalists to lose seats in Scotland. It could be pivotal in helping Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer become British prime minister.  There were growing calls for former First Minister Sturgeon, 52, to be suspended from the party, which she led 11 weeks ago, pending the outcome of the investigation. She will not be suspended  "But the former leader will not be suspended," said Humza Yousaf, the new party chairman and first-generation Scottish-born Pakistani.  Angus MacNeil, one of the SNP's longest-serving MPs, called for "political distance until the inquiry is over either way.""This soap opera has gone far enough: Nicola Sturgeon suspended others from the SNP for far less," he asserted.  Ash Regan, a former SNP leadership candidate, called on Sturgeon to resign her membership while under investigation.  "As a party and as individuals in leadership positions, we must always strive to uphold the highest standards of integrity and accountability," Regan said.  "In the interests of transparency and to ensure the smooth running of our party during this time of uncertainty, it would be advisable for Nicola Sturgeon to consider stepping aside temporarily from her responsibilities in the party until things are clarified," he called.  The Scottish Conservatives also called on Humza Yousaf, the first minister, Sturgeon's chosen successor, to suspend her from the party. Scotland's first minister, Humza Yousaf, has rejected calls ,both inside and outside his party , to suspend Nicola Sturgeon following her arrest and release.  "No, I will not suspend Nicola Sturgeon. I will treat her in exactly the same way as I treated, for example, Colin Beattie, both of whom were released without charge and therefore there is no reason to suspend them," Yousaf explained. When asked about the fact that Nicola Sturgeon, when first minister had suspended people in similar situations, Yousaf insisted that she is being "consistent" in her own approach and cannot account for what others have done in the past. "I am innocent." Sturgeon's questioning follows the arrest of her husband, Peter Murrell, former SNP chief executive, in April ahead of a two-day police search of the couple's Glasgow home. Colin Beattie, the SNP treasurer at the time, was arrested later in April and subsequently resigned from the party.  "To find myself in the situation I was in, when I am sure I have committed no crime, is both a shock and deeply distressing," Sturgeon said. She promised to return to the Scottish parliament "soon" and insisted she would "never do anything to harm the SNP or the country." "Obviously, given the nature of this process, I cannot go into detail. However, I wish to say this, and to do so in the strongest possible terms: innocence is not just a presumption to which I am entitled by law. I know, without a doubt, that I am, in fact, innocent," he concluded. PB Load-Date: June 13, 2023  End of Document
