   Rishi Sunak took helicopter to housebuilding visit where he defended government’s ‘green credentials’ – UK politics live The Guardian (London) August 29, 2023 Tuesday 9:36 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:14 Length: 5768 words Byline: Tom Ambrose (now) and Caroline Davies (earlier) Highlight: PM flew to Norwich for the event where it was announced the government scrapping of nutrient neutrality rules Body   block-time published-time 4.56pm BST   Closing summary   Here is a round-up of the day’s main headlines: Scrapping EU-era environmental protections on nutrient neutrality will allow for an additional 100,000 homes to be built in England by 2030, the government has claimed.  Environmental campaigners have criticised the planned change, but the government says housing developments contribute only a small fraction of nutrient pollution and new funding is being provided to mitigate any associated increase. The changes will see the financial burden to mitigate nutrient pollution for new housing shifted from developers to taxpayers, PA Media reports.Rishi Sunak has defended his government’s green credentials, as environmental campaigners criticised the scrapping of nutrient neutrality rules aimed at limiting nitrogen and phosphorus in waterways.  “Of course we want to get to net zero, but we just want to do that in a proportionate and pragmatic way that does not unnecessarily burden families and households in the process. We have got a proud track record on tackling climate change, we have reduced our emissions faster than pretty much any developed country,” he told broadcasters.The shadow housing secretary, Lisa Nandy, said housebuilders should not be asked to cover for the government’s “abject failure” on environmental policy.   She said: “With housebuilding projected to fall to the lowest level since world war two and our rivers full of sewage, the Conservatives are failing on both housing and the environment. The government is responsible for environmental policy; housebuilders should not be asked to cover for their abject failure.”The introduction of post-Brexit checks on food, plant and animal produce arriving in Britain has been delayed for the fifth time, the government has confirmed, meaning they will not begin until the end of January next year. The decision to once again push back the beginning of new controls on imports, which was widely anticipated , means the phased introduction has been delayed by a further three months from late October.Rishi Sunak said he wants people to “have confidence” in his plan to curb Channel crossings, as the total so far this year approaches 20,000.  The prime minister said the number of arrivals was lower than last year and this showed his plan to “stop the boats” was “working”. Provisional Home Office data shows that in 2023 so far 19,801 people have arrived in the UK after crossing the Channel. This is 21% down on this time last year when more than 25,000 had already made the journey, PA news agency analysis of government figures shows.Downing Street has rejected Nadine Dorries’ criticism that Rishi Sunak has presided over a “zombie parliament”. The prime minister’s official spokesperson said Sunak could point to a number of achievements, including securing the Windsor framework deal with the EU and making headway in halving inflation. He said Sunak was “very much focused... on delivering for the public”, PA reports.Rishi Sunak welcomed the crown prince of Kuwait to Downing Street on Tuesday. The pair emerged from the front door of No 10 together, standing side by side and shook hands, PA Media reported. Sheikh Meshal al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah’s convoy did not arrive through the front gates of Downing Street, as is normally the case with world leaders. Anti-Ulez protesters are demonstrating on the road outside Downing Street but it is unclear if that was the reason for the change.A former minister who is to work for a Bahraini investment company has been criticised after he did not declare 13 meetings with its single largest shareholder, the Abu Dhabi sovereign wealth fund, when seeking permission to take the role.  Sir Gerry Grimstone, as he was then, was elevated to the peerage and handed a job in Boris Johnson’s government in March 2020, serving as minister of state for investment until July 2022.The foreign secretary, James Cleverly, will visit China tomorrow as part of efforts to ease tensions between the west and Beijing.  He will hold talks with China’s foreign affairs minister, Wang Yi, and the vice-president, Han Zheng, PA Media reported. The UK believes that engagement with Xi Jinping’s administration is essential given its important economic and political influence around the world.Police chiefs have suggested the home secretary is interfering with their operational independence by demanding forces pursue all reasonable crime leads at a time when their resources are being outstripped by a rise in offences.  The National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) raised serious doubts about an initiative Suella Braverman  used to launch the government’s crime week with insistence that there was “no such thing as minor crime”.Notting Hill Carnival should be moved and potentially held in a park, the Conservative party’s London mayoral candidate has said, following a spate of stabbing incidents.  Two men are in hospital, one in a critical condition, after attacks at the festival held in the streets of west London on Sunday and Monday, while a police officer reported being sexually assaulted, PA Media reported.The number of people in Scotland whose death was caused by alcohol has risen again to the highest level in 14 years, although the National Records of Scotland, which produces the data, said the rise by two per cent from 2022 was “not considered statistically significant.”  Regardless, Scotland still has the highest alcohol-related deaths in the whole of UK, with numbers on the rise for the past decade, and opposition parties are questioning what impact the Scottish government’s flagship minimum unit pricing policy has had.A multimillionaire businessman with close links to the Conservative party has been told to knock down part or all of a luxury hotel that hosted the signing of Rishi Sunak’s Brexit  deal because he breached planning regulations.  A planning enforcement notice issued by Runnymede borough council said Surinder Arora’s hotel company had until 7 October to take action at the Fairmont Windsor Park hotel near Windsor.Chronic under-investment, exploitation and low pay is leading to widespread poverty among workers in the care sector, according to damning research from the Trades Union Congress.  As it publishes its first workforce blueprint  for the care economy, the TUC argues that the “Cinderella sectors” of social care and childcare need urgent investment to head off a demographic time bomb. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, and indeed the UK politics live blog for today. Thanks for following along. block-time published-time 4.12pm BST   The Notting Hill  carnival should be moved and potentially held in a park, the Conservative party’s London mayoral candidate has said,  after a spate of stabbing incidents.  Two men are in hospital, one in a critical condition, after attacks at the festival held in the streets of west London on Sunday and Monday, while a police officer reported being sexually assaulted, PA Media reported. Susan Hall, who has been selected as the Tory party’s 2024 London mayoral candidate, called for the event to be held in a different location, saying police “don’t want to be there”. However, a spokesperson for the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said the event was “born out of the Caribbean community in north Kensington and Notting Hill” and that this should “remain its home”. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.48pm BST block-time published-time 3.48pm BST       Rishi Sunak and Michael Gove meeting Jennie Daly, the CEO of Taylor Wimpey, during a visit to the Heather Gardens housing development in Norwich. Photograph: Reuters     block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.56pm BST block-time published-time 3.02pm BST   Former minister Gerry Grimstone under fire over undeclared UAE meetings    A former minister who is to work for a Bahraini investment company has been criticised after he did not declare 13 meetings with its single largest shareholder, the Abu Dhabi sovereign wealth fund, when seeking permission to take the role.  Sir Gerry Grimstone, as he was then, was elevated to the peerage and handed a job in Boris Johnson’s government in March 2020, serving as minister of state for investment until July 2022. His time in Whitehall complete, Lord Grimstone is returning to Investcorp, a Bahrain-based investment manager with offices in Mayfair. Investcorp’s single largest shareholder, owning 20% of the company since March 2017, is Mubadala, the Abu Dhabi sovereign wealth fund. He is to serve as an adviser and the chair of Investcorp’s planned climate fund. The Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (Acoba) approved  Grimstone’s role with Investcorp after he and the Department for Business and Trade told the committee that he may have had occasional contact with Investcorp but had made no decisions relating to it. But ministerial transparency records show Grimstone met at least 13 times with Investcorp’s key stakeholder, Mubadala, including meetings with its chief executive, Khaldoon al-Mubarak, who is also the chair of Manchester City. There is no specific reference to shareholders in the business appointment rules, but Acoba’s guidance for ministers does say applicants should provide “detailed information about […] their involvement in relevant matters in office. Applicants must provide as much information as possible.”  Related:  Former minister Gerry Grimstone under fire over undeclared UAE meetings block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.12pm BST block-time published-time 2.36pm BST   Rishi Sunak welcomed the  crown  prince of Kuwait to Downing Street on Tuesday.  The pair emerged from the front door of No 10 together, standing side by side and shook hands, PA Media reported. Sheikh Meshal al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah’s convoy did not arrive through the front gates of Downing Street, as is normally the case with world leaders. Anti-Ulez protesters are demonstrating on the road outside Downing Street but it is unclear if that was the reason for the change.     Rishi Sunak welcomes crown prince of Kuwait, Sheikh Mishal al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah to 10 Downing Street. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA    The pair are expected to discuss trade and investment between the two countries. The prime minister said: Your Highness, it is such a great pleasure to welcome you to Downing Street. “The friendship between our countries stretches back over 100 years. I am excited today to talk to you about the future, how we can strengthen our partnership, both economically and for our mutual security. Sheikh Meshal al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah, speaking through a translator and in brief remarks, said he was “ready” to “cooperate and to support”. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.09pm BST block-time published-time 2.18pm BST   The shadow housing secretary, Lisa Nandy, said housebuilders should not be asked to cover for the government’s “abject failure” on environmental policy.  She said: With housebuilding projected to fall to the lowest level since world war two and our rivers full of sewage, the Conservatives are failing on both housing and the environment. The government is responsible for environmental policy; housebuilders should not be asked to cover for their abject failure. Labour will support effective measures that get Britain building, but it’s laughable to think that a prime minister who is too weak to stand up to the nimbys on his backbenches can be trusted to deliver the housing Britain needs. Labour supports a strategic approach to housebuilding, with housing targets developed in partnership with local areas. The next Labour government will bring an end to the Tory sewage scandal by delivering mandatory monitoring on all sewage outlets, introducing automatic fines for discharges paid for by eroding dividends, setting ambitious targets for stopping systematic sewage dumping and ensuring that water bosses are legally held to account for negligence. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.29pm BST block-time published-time 2.01pm BST  There are more details on the delay to the introduction of post-Brexit checks on food, plant and animal produce arriving in Britain in the Guardian’s detailed report. You can read it here:  Related:  UK post-Brexit checks on fresh food from EU delayed for fifth time block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.07pm BST block-time published-time 1.55pm BST   Rishi Sunak took helicopter to housebuilding visit where he defended government's 'green credentials'   Once again, the prime minister has eschewed cheaper transport opportunities for his housebuilder-related announcement, the Guardian’s deputy political editor reports below. enltrJet set Rishi latest: No 10 confirm that the prime minister flew by helicopter from London to Norwich for his housebuilding-related visit this morning. It's about 1hr 45m on a train. — Peter Walker (@peterwalker99) August 29, 2023 enltrDowning Street say that in addition to normal prime ministerial time pressures, Sunak is scheduled to meet the crown prince of Bahrain this afternoon. — Peter Walker (@peterwalker99) August 29, 2023 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.01pm BST block-time published-time 1.48pm BST  Rishi Sunak said he wants people to “have confidence” in his plan to curb Channel crossings, as the total so far this year approaches 20,000.  The prime minister said the number of arrivals was lower than last year and this showed his plan to “stop the boats” was “working”. Provisional Home Office data shows that in 2023 so far 19,801 people have arrived in the UK after crossing the Channel. This is 21% down on this time last year when more than 25,000 had already made the journey, PA news agency analysis of government figures shows. The pace and volume of crossings slowed over the bank holiday weekend, with just 60 people detected making the journey in one boat on Sunday and no crossings recorded on Saturday or Monday, according to revised Home Office figures. Speaking to broadcasters on Tuesday during a visit to Norfolk, Sunak said: This year, for the first time since the small boats crisis emerged, the numbers crossing are down. It’s important for people to understand that. This year for the first time the numbers of people crossing are lower than the year before. That hasn’t happened before. That shows that the plan is working. Of course, there’s more to do, but I want people to have confidence that we are on it, and we’ll keep going. Sunak previously played down suggestions that the lower number of crossings compared with last year was linked to poor weather conditions rather than policy decisions. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.55pm BST block-time published-time 1.43pm BST   The implementation of post-Brexit border checks on food products coming from the EU has been delayed for a fifth time, the government has confirmed.  The first stage of the UK’s new border model, originally set for October, is now delayed to January 2024, with physical checks and other requirements coming in throughout the next year, PA reports. The extension was confirmed as the Cabinet Office published its new “border target operating model”, which delineates the UK’s upcoming approach to safety and security controls on all imports, with a particular emphasis on sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures for goods such as live animals, plants, and animal products. The Cabinet Office said: Having listened to the views of industry, the government has agreed to a delay of three months for the introduction of remaining sanitary and phytosanitary controls, as well as full customs controls for non-qualifying Northern Ireland goods, which will now be introduced from January 2024. To give stakeholders additional time to prepare for the new checks, further controls have a revised timetable. These include checks on medium-risk animal products, plants, plant products and high-risk food (and feed) of non-animal origin from the EU, implemented in April 2024, and safety and security declarations for EU imports, implemented in October 2024. Goods from Britain have faced EU controls since it left the bloc’s single market at the start of 2021, but the UK has repeatedly put off checks in the other direction. According to the revised timetable, starting from 31 January 2024, imports of medium-risk animal products, plants, plant products and high-risk non-animal origin food (and feed) from the EU will require health certification. By 30 April 2024, these items will undergo documentary, identity and physical checks, while imports of sanitary and phytosanitary goods from other parts of the world will adopt a new risk-based approach. From 31 October 2024, safety and security declarations for EU imports will become mandatory, along with a more streamlined dataset for imports. Downing Street said the government had been “mindful of the impact of inflation” but signalled that there would be no more delays. The prime minister’s official spokesperson said: Throughout this we have been mindful of the impact of inflation, but I am not aware of any plans to move beyond the dates we have set out. We are introducing a sufficient time to enable businesses and those affected to plan. That is what we have set out to them. It is worth being mindful that it is because of conversations with these businesses that we have brought in further time to plan so we have been listening to businesses throughout. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.54pm BST block-time published-time 1.20pm BST   No 10 rejects Dorries claim Sunak is leading a 'zombie parliament' as PM says he is 'grateful for her service as MP'   Downing Street has rejected Nadine Dorries’ criticism that Rishi Sunak has presided over a “zombie parliament”. The prime minister’s official spokesperson said Sunak could point to a number of achievements, including securing the Windsor framework deal with the EU and making headway in halving inflation. He said Sunak was “very much focused... on delivering for the public”, PA reports. The Treasury, meanwhile, has confirmed that the chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, has appointed Dorries to be steward and bailiff of the three hundreds of Chiltern, the archaic mechanism for quitting the Commons. It comes after the former culture secretary finally handed in her resignation over the weekend, with a byelection now set to be scheduled in the Mid Bedfordshire constituency. Sunak said today that he was “grateful” to Dorries “for her service both as an MP and a minister”. He added: “We are looking forward, and delighted to support our fantastic candidate in Mid Beds, Festus Akinbusoye, who is the local candidate, the only local candidate in this election; also the local police and crime commissioner.” Dorries’ formal exit means a motion called a “writ” can be moved when parliament returns on 4 September, giving between 21 and 27 working days for the byelection. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.57pm BST block-time published-time 1.09pm BST  The government’s plan to relax nutrient neutrality rules for housebuilders has drawn criticism from the WWF UK wildlife charity.  Alec Taylor, head of policy (Production) at WWF UK, said:  Rather than condemning England’s already pollution-choked rivers to death by a thousand cuts, the Government must instead deliver on their international commitment to halve nutrient waste by 2030. If it wants to enable housebuilding, the Government should be supporting farmers to cut agricultural pollution and regulating water companies, not weakening the rules. block-time published-time 12.40pm BST   The number of people in Scotland whose death was caused by alcohol has risen again to the highest level in 14 years, although the National Records of Scotland, which produces the data, said the rise by two per cent from 2022 was “not considered statistically significant.”  Regardless, Scotland still has the highest alcohol-related deaths in the whole of UK, with numbers on the rise for the past decade, and opposition parties are questioning what impact the Scottish government’s flagship minimum unit pricing policy has had. There were 1,276 alcohol-specific deaths in Scotland last year, with a mortality rate of 22.9 deaths per 100,000 people in 2022, up from 22.3 the previous year. Alcohol Focus Scotland said the increase was “completely unacceptable” and called for the Scottish government to increase its minimum unit pricing policy – which sets a baseline price at which a unit of alcohol may be sold - to 65p “to help save many more lives”. But Scottish Conservatives health spokesperson Sandesh Gulhane said the figures proved MUP was “simply not working”, adding:  It is increasingly proving to be a blunt instrument to tackle a complex problem. block-time published-time 12.20pm BST   A multimillionaire businessman with close links to the Conservative party has been told to knock down part or all of a luxury hotel that hosted the signing of Rishi Sunak’s Brexit  deal because he breached planning regulations.  A planning enforcement notice issued by Runnymede borough council said Surinder Arora’s hotel company had until 7 October to take action at the Fairmont Windsor Park hotel near Windsor. This would involve either “making the unauthorised building comply with the terms of the planning permission” or else the company would need to “demolish the building in its entirety and remove all resultant waste and material from the land”, the notice said. Arora, a Tory party donor, has accepted errors were made during extension work to the hotel, saying this was due to a “highly challenging construction site” as a result of the Covid pandemic. The Fairmont Windsor Park, a converted 19th-century mansion that describes itself as “a luxurious countryside hotel where history and elegance merge”, was where Sunak and Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, signed a revised Brexit deal  in February. The so-called Windsor framework was an attempt to solve many months of wrangling over trade and border arrangements for Northern Ireland.  Related:  Tory donor issued with demolition order for hotel where Brexit deal signed block-time published-time 11.55am BST   Chronic under-investment, exploitation and low pay is leading to widespread poverty among workers in the care sector, according to damning research from the Trades Union Congress.  As it publishes its first workforce blueprint  for the care economy, the TUC argues that the “Cinderella sectors” of social care and childcare need urgent investment to head off a demographic timebomb. Across the UK, care workers are earning below the real living wage – £10.90 an hour outside London and £11.95 in the capital – while more than a quarter of children with a parent working in social care are growing up in poverty , according to the TUC research.  Related:  Exploitation and low pay causing poverty among care workers, TUC finds block-time published-time 11.31am BST   The government’s plan to relax nutrient neutrality rules for housebuilders could be “the most serious blow for environmental law for decades”, a leading conservationist has said.  Richard Benwell, chief executive of Wildlife and Countryside Link, said the Government is “carving away” at the UK’s most important nature protections - the Habitats Regulations. He added:  If the government is willing to strip away vital protection to save money for developers in polluted catchments, then where will it draw the line? This could be the most serious blow for environmental law in decades. What the government is proposing here is to remove legal protections for nature, throw away requirements for polluters to pay, and instead use taxpayers’ money to try to fill the gap. But a single, short-term capital injection will do nothing to make up for the harm that our rivers and wildlife will suffer as a result. block-time published-time 11.22am BST   Craig Bennett, chief executive of the Wildlife Trusts, has accused the government of lying about its commitments not to lower environmental protections after it announced a relaxation of nutrient neutrality rules.  He said:  In May, June and July, the government made promises to the British people and to Parliament that they would not lower environmental protections or standards, but just a few weeks later they are planning to do precisely the opposite. They lied - this is a disgraceful move which undermines public trust in this government. Make no mistake - this is a licence from the government for the commercial housebuilding lobby to profit from the pollution of our rivers. The government has made repeated pledges that they won’t weaken environmental standards and committed just eight months ago to halve nutrient pollution by the end of the decade. This is another broken promise and makes clear that the prime minister would rather look after the interests of developers than the environment - money talks. block-time published-time 10.56am BST   Prime minister defends government's green credentials after scrapping of nutrient neutrality rules    Rishi Sunak has defended his government’s green credentials, as environmental campaigners criticised the scrapping of nutrient neutrality rules aimed at limiting nitrogen and phosphorus in waterways.  It is the latest government policy that has drawn the ire of campaigners, but Sunak said he wanted to reach net zero in a way that does not hurt struggling households, PA Media reported. “Of course we want to get to net zero, but we just want to do that in a proportionate and pragmatic way that does not unnecessarily burden families and households in the process. We have got a proud track record on tackling climate change, we have reduced our emissions faster than pretty much any developed country,” he told broadcasters. Referencing recent government investment in carbon capture technology, as well as the Plan for Water, the Prime Minister said:  We are taking strong steps to protect our environment, reduce our emissions but do that in a proportionate and pragmatic way that protects families too. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.00am BST block-time published-time 10.48am BST   Police chiefs have suggested the home secretary is interfering with their operational independence by demanding forces pursue all reasonable crime leads at a time when their resources are being outstripped by a rise in offences.  The National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) raised serious doubts about an initiative Suella Braverman  used to launch the government’s crime week with insistence that there was “no such thing as minor crime”. Braverman instructed forces to follow all evidence  such as footage from CCTV, doorbells and dashcams, as well as phone data, to find a suspect or stolen property. The NPCC responded to the plan in an open letter to Braverman, which pointedly began: “For decades, police forces have had a duty to pursue all reasonable leads of an alleged crime.” On Monday, Braverman said forces had the resources to pursue all reasonable leads , and pointed to the government’s restoration of 20,000 officers that were cut between 2010 and 2018. However, the letter by the NPCC chair, chief constable Gavin Stephens, suggested her plan was unrealistic given the squeeze on police funding at a time of rising crime. “To see trust in police return to where it used to be, an effectively staffed and properly funded police service is essential,” the letter said.  Related:  Braverman ‘interfering with police independence’ after crime pledge block-time published-time 10.24am BST   Government defends plans to scrap EU-era environmental protections    Scrapping EU-era environmental protections on nutrient neutrality will allow for an additional 100,000 homes to be built in England by 2030, the government has claimed.  Environmental campaigners have criticised the planned change, but the government says housing developments contribute only a small fraction of nutrient pollution and new funding is being provided to mitigate any associated increase. The changes will see the financial burden to mitigate nutrient pollution for new housing shifted from developers to taxpayers, PA Media reports. The government says it intends to work with the house building industry to ensure that larger developers make what it describes as an appropriate and fair contribution to the scheme over the coming years. No detail on that has been announced, but the government said it is discussing how to do so with the Home Builders Federation. The government said it would double investment in its nutrient mitigation scheme, being run by Natural England, to £280 million. And an additional £166 million will be allocated for slurry infrastructure grants. The government describes nutrient pollution as an “urgent problem” for freshwater habitats, many of which it says are “internationally important for wildlife, and acknowledges it needs to tackle the issue to meet legal commitments to restore species abundance. Housing secretary Michael Gove said:  We are committed to building the homes this country needs and to enhancing our environment. The way EU rules have been applied has held us back. These changes will provide a multibillion-pound boost for the UK economy and see us build more than 100,000 new homes. Protecting the environment is paramount which is why the measures we’re announcing today will allow us to go further to protect and restore our precious waterways whilst still building the much-needed homes this country needs. We will work closely with environmental agencies and councils as we deliver these changes. Environment secretary Therese Coffey said:  These new plans will cut nutrients and help support England’s precious habitats whilst unlocking the new homes that local communities need. We are going to tackle the key causes of nutrients at source with over £200 million of funding to reduce run-off from agriculture and plans to upgrade waste water treatment works through conventional upgrades, catchment approaches and nature-based solutions. This builds on the key commitments made in our five-year strategy - our Environmental Improvement Plan - as well as our Plan for Water which brings forward more investment, stronger regulation and tougher enforcement to protect our rivers. Housebuilders have welcomed the plans but Greenpeace UK has criticised them, saying it allows builders to “cut corners”. block-time published-time 10.07am BST   The by-election in Mid Bedfordshire is going to be “tough”, the transport secretary has said.  Mark Harper told TalkTV:  I looked at her (Nadine Dorries’) letter. I don’t agree with any of it. But look, you are right, the by-election is going to be tough. All mid-term by-elections are tough. We’ve got a fantastic candidate in Festus, who’s the police and crime commissioner there. He’s well known, well respected and well liked. I know that from doors that I’ve knocked on we will be fighting hard for every vote. But you’re right, it’s tough mid-term by-elections, it won’t be an easy fight. But we’re going to go out there and give it everything we’ve got. block-time published-time 9.50am BST   China must show 'responsibility', says Cleverly before trip    The  foreign secretary, James Cleverly, will visit China tomorrow as part of efforts to ease tensions between the west and Beijing.  He will hold talks with China’s foreign affairs minister, Wang Yi, and the vice-president, Han Zheng, PA Media reported. The UK believes that engagement with Xi Jinping’s administration is essential given its important economic and political influence around the world. Cleverly has promised he will raise concerns over human rights and the treatment of Hong Kong during his trip. And he will argue that with China’s global significance comes a responsibility for international security: helping to end Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, calming tensions in the South China Sea and ceasing malign activity in cyberspace. Cleverly said: It is important we manage our relationship with China across a range of issues. No significant global problem – from climate change to pandemic prevention, from economic instability to nuclear proliferation – can be solved without China. China’s size, history and global significance means they cannot be ignored, but that comes with a responsibility on the global stage. That responsibility means China fulfilling its international commitments and obligations. Cleverly follows in the footsteps of his US counterpart, Antony Blinken, who visited Beijing in June, and his trip will be the first by a UK foreign secretary since 2018. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.07am BST block-time published-time 9.36am BST   England’s rivers at risk as Gove rips up rules on new housing    Good morning and welcome to the UK politics live blog. We start with news that Michael Gove is planning to rip up water pollution rules that builders have blamed for exacerbating England’s housing crisis but which environmental groups say are essential for protecting the country’s rivers.  The housing secretary, with Thérèse Coffey, the environment secretary, will announce the move on Tuesday, according to several people briefed on the plans, alongside hundreds of millions of pounds’ worth of extra funding to mitigate the potential impact on England’s waterways. The decision will spark anger among environmentalists , who say it will further add to water pollution, as water companies are already dumping raw sewage into rivers and seas. Political advisers say water pollution has already become a major political issue in coastal areas, and has the potential to cost the Conservatives important seats at the next election. Doug Parr, policy director at Greenpeace UK, said: Who would look at our sickly, sewage-infested rivers and conclude that what they need is weaker pollution rules? No one, and that should include our government. Scrapping or weakening limits on chemicals from sewage and farm runoffs would be a sure sign that ministers have completely given up on saving our great waterways and the precious wildlife they host. Meanwhile, Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrats’ environmental spokesperson, said: Not content with the levels of pollution in our rivers already, scrapping nutrient neutrality is a disgraceful act from the government. The Conservatives seem happy for Britain’s rivers to get even worse. We’ll bring you more on that throughout the day, with the prime minister, Rishi Sunak, expected to speak to the media on a visit later this morning. Elsewhere, there is continued chatter about the Mid Bedfordshire byelection following Nadine Dorries’ long-awaited resignation, and the government is also expected to confirm it is delaying post-Brexit border checks on food coming from the EU later today. Stay tuned. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.17am BST Load-Date: August 29, 2023  End of Document
