   Rishi Sunak says immigration must fall but declines to say which new measures he backs – UK politics live The Guardian (London) November 24, 2023 Friday 9:25 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:10 Length: 3951 words Byline: Andrew Sparrow Highlight: Net migration to the UK in 2023 is estimated at 672,000, and the PM says a more ‘sustainable’ level is needed Body   block-time published-time 3.00pm GMT  Downing Street has not denied reports that the Foreign Office intervened to “soften” language used by the culture secretary to avoid offending an Abu Dhabi-backed fund seeking to take over the Telegraph newspaper , PA Media reports. PA says: Lucy Frazer had suggested this week she was “minded” to open an investigation into whether the deal was against the public interest and the effect it may have on press freedom. She said she had written to the fund, RedBird IMI, as well as the publication’s previous owners, the Barclay family, and their bank, Lloyds, to inform them of the possible intervention. Officials are said to have been worried about offending the United Arab Emirates – which includes Abu Dhabi – ahead of a summit in London for foreign investors next week, the Telegraph reported. On Friday, Number 10 said it was “standard procedure” for the Foreign Office to advise other government departments. Asked whether there were concerns over the reports, a spokesperson said: “I wouldn’t usually get into speculative reporting. I would just say it’s also standard practice for the Foreign Office to provide advice to other government departments, but to be very clear this matter and decision is solely one for the culture secretary.” block-time published-time 2.38pm GMT   Humza Yousaf says Scottish government will 'robustly' defend itself against Salmond's legal action    Alex Salmond, the former Scottish first minister, has said the Scottish government faces “a day of reckoning” as a result of his legal action against it. (See 1.26pm. ) In a statement he said: Despite Lord Pentland’s findings in the court of session that the behaviour of the former permanent secretary and her officials was ‘unlawful’, ‘unfair’ and ‘tainted by apparent bias’, despite the ongoing police and Crown Office inquiries into the criminal leaks and potential perjury at the criminal trial, despite the astonishing revelations of misfeasance contained in the eventual publication of the government’s own legal advice, and despite the specific findings of the parliamentary inquiry into the conduct of the former permanent secretary and the former first minister, not one single person has been held accountable. With this court action that evasion of responsibility ends.  Humza Yousaf, the current first minister, said the government would defend its record. Speaking in Dublin, where he is attending the British-Irish Council meeting, he said: Unsurprisingly to anyone listening or watching, the Scottish government will defend its position robustly, but I’ll say no more because that’s a live case.      Humza Yousaf (right) with Michael Gove, at a press conference during the British-Irish Council (BIC) summit at Dublin Castle. Photograph: Brian Lawless/PA Media     block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.47pm GMT block-time published-time 1.26pm GMT   Salmond launches £3m legal action against Scottish government over its handling of harassment claims against him    Alex Salmond, Scotland’s former first minister, has launched legal action against the Scottish government over its botched investigation of harassment complaints against him, PA Media reports. PA says: The court of session confirmed to the PA the case, Alex Salmond v Scottish ministers, had been called. The Herald reported the now-Alba party leader has alleged “misfeasance” by civil servants and is seeking £3m in damages and loss of earnings. Salmond – who was first minister between 2007 and 2014 – was investigated by the Scottish government after two complaints from staff were made under a new complaints procedure which included former ministers. The investigation was deemed by a judicial review to have been “tainted with apparent bias” after the Scottish government conceded defeat and Salmond was awarded £512,000 as a result. He was subsequently cleared of 13 charges of sexual misconduct – including attempted rape – following a trial at the high court in Edinburgh. Then followed a protracted Holyrood inquiry into the Scottish government’s handling of the original two complaints, which called both Salmond and former first minister Nicola Sturgeon to give evidence. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.43pm GMT block-time published-time 1.21pm GMT   Starmer names Ode to Joy as classical music that best sums up Labour   Pro-Europeans despair at Keir Starmer ’s refusal to criticise Brexit, let alone to suggest that it should be reversed. But they may take some comfort from the fact that he has named Beethoven’s Ode to Joy, which serves as the EU’s anthem , as the piece of classical music that best sums up Labour.  Starmer was responding to a question in an interview with Classic FM, and he told the station: One of the pieces I’ve got is Beethoven’s 9th Symphony, the choral Ode to Joy. You’ve got the orchestra, you’ve got the voices, you’ve got this big combination. This is very sort of Labour. You’re getting everybody, Beethoven’s getting everybody on to the stage for this. I talk about a national mission for the next Labour government. This is a sense of something. It has got a sense of destiny and is hugely optimistic. And so, for me, that’s been hardwired in me for a long, long time. So, I would go with that. There are many others that I could associate with the Labour party, but that sense of moving forward to a better place is incredibly powerful. As PA Media reports, Starmer was a former junior scholar at Guildhall and played the flute, piano and violin as a child. He has spoken previously of listening to Beethoven more generally to help deal with the strains of work, describing classical music as a “great release” for him. block-time published-time 1.06pm GMT   No 10 says New Zealand's decision to repeal law banning smoking for future generations won't stop UK passing same law   Rishi Sunak’s plan to pass a law that would stop anyone 14 or younger every being able to buy cigarettes (by raising the legal age at which people can buy them year by year) was inspired by legislation doing the same in New Zealand.  It was passed by the governing Labour and Green parties and came into force in January this year. But, following an election last month, a rightwing coalition has taken power  in New Zealand and, under the coalition agreement , it is going to repeal the law banning smoking for future generations. At the Downing Street lobby briefing this morning the No 10 spokesperson said the U-turn in New Zealand would not stop Sunak implementing the measure in the UK. Asked if Sunak would drop the plan, the spokesperson said: No, our position remains unchanged. We are committed to that. This is an important long-term decision and step to deliver a smoke-free generation which remains critically important. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.07pm GMT block-time published-time 12.49pm GMT  At the Downing Street lobby briefing this morning the No 10 spokesperson would not say whether Rishi Sunak supports the plans for tighter immigration controls reportedly proposed  by Robert Jenrick, the immigration minister. The spokesperson just said discussions between No 10 and government departments were “routine”. But No 10 did back James Cleverly, the home secretary. Asked if Rishi Sunak found Cleverly’s new account  of his foul-mouthed outburst at PMQs on Wednesday credible, the spokesperson said yes. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.44pm GMT block-time published-time 12.26pm GMT  When Nigel Farage was leading the Brexit party, it was considerably influential for a party with no MPs, winning the European elections in 2019 and helping to push the Conservative party into a harder position on Brexit. After the 2019 election it was renamed Reform UK, Richard Tice took over as leader and it became much more marginal. But in an interview on the Today programme this morning Tice claimed that the government’s failure to bring down immigration was presenting it with an opportunity. He told the programme: The British people voted to control immigration, and the government have betrayed the people’s promises. And that’s why so many thousands of people, former Tory members, are joining us. Our polling numbers – we got record polling last week, four different polls where we’re in double figures. This week, we’ve had Tory donors joining us. Frankly, I fully expect Tory MPs who are furious and angry with the government to be calling me next week. Tice said Reform UK wanted a “one in, one out” policy on migration. The latest Politico poll of polls  puts Reform UK support at 7%. On this measure, backing for the party has increased marginally in recent months.     Richard Tice Photograph: Vickie Flores/EPA       block-time published-time 12.11pm GMT       David Cameron, the foreign secretary (left), meeting the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, in Ramallah today. Photograph: PPO/Getty Images     block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.45pm GMT block-time published-time 11.46am GMT   Stride says he believes James Cleverly's claim he did not insult Stockton, just its MP   In his interview on the Today programme this morning Mel Stride, the work and pensions secretary, said he accepted James Cleverly’s claim that he did not refer to Stockton as a “shit-hole” in the Commons at PMQs on Wednesday, but that he did insult the town’s Labour MP.  Asked about Cleverly’s version of what was said, which is not believed by the Stockton North MP Alex Cunningham, Stride said: [Cleverly] has made the point that he says that it was not aimed at a particular place. Knowing James well, he’s not the sort of person, in my opinion, who would have made that kind of remark in that kind of context. But he has accepted that this was certainly unparliamentary language and he has rightly apologised. In fact, Cleverly has not apologised in person. Yesterday “a source” close to him told PA Media that Cleverly apologises, which is not quite the same thing. block-time published-time 11.35am GMT  Turning back to immigration, this is from Craig Oliver, David Cameron’s former communications director at No 10. Oliver doesn’t often criticise his old boss in public but it was Cameron who promised, ahead of the 2010 general election, to get annual net migration below 100,000 , and Oliver is including him in the last of Tory leaders who have mishandled this issue. The great strategic error of the ? @Conservatives  ? has been telling people repeatedly there are simple solutions to net migration. The 10s of thousands plan, Brexit, Rwanda, now pure panic. It’s time for a grown up conversation on immigration. enltrThe great strategic error of the ? @Conservatives  ? has been telling people repeatedly there are simple solutions to net migration. The 10s of thousands plan, Brexit, Rwanda, now pure panic. It’s time for a grown up conversation on immigration. https://t.co/Pvd9eUbIIz  — Craig Oliver (@CraigOliver100) November 24, 2023 block-time published-time 11.25am GMT   Autumn statement does little to make people feel more positive about their economic prospects, poll suggests   Coming back to the Times YouGov polling (see 10.06am  ), the responses to questions about the autumn statement are more significant than the latest voting intention findings. The poll suggests many of the main announcements have strong public support (but not freezing alcohol duties – which may come as a surprise to politicians who assume that’s always a dead-cert vote winner).     Polling on autumn statement measures Photograph: YouGov/Times    But, as Oliver Wright reports reports in his story , while voters may have welcomed what Jeremy Hunt was doing, the chancellor did not make them feel more positive about their economic prospects. Wright says: Only 7% said the economy was in a good state, compared with 6% in March, and the number saying it was in a bad state had dropped from 73% to 69%. There was very little optimism about the future. Only 14% thought that the financial situation of their household would get better over the next 12 months compared with 12% in March. The proportion saying it would get worse had dropped, however, from 51% to 41%. When asked about Britain’s economic situation overall 18% thought things would get better over the next year — unchanged since March while 48% thought they would get worse. Asked whether Hunt’s budget measures would make them and their family better off 18% said they would, compared with 15% who said they would be worse off and 55% who said the changes would not make much difference to their circumstances. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.31am GMT block-time published-time 11.01am GMT   Sunak says immigration must fall to 'more sustainable' level – but declines to say what further measures he backs   In an interview at the Nissan plant, Rishi Sunak refused to apologise for the government failing to honour the 2019 Tory manifesto promise to reduce immigration. But he said he did think immigration levels were too high. He said: I’m very clear that the levels of migration are too high, and they’ve got to come down to more sustainable levels. I’ve been clear about that. It’s good to see that the ONS yesterday did say that the levels of migration are now slowing, in their words, which is a welcome step. But we’ve got more to go. That’s why I announced a policy earlier [in May]  to clamp down on the number of dependents that students can bring when they’re coming here … That action I took represents the single toughest measure that anyone has taken to bring down the levels of legal migration in a very long time. So that should give people a sense of my commitment to bringing migration down. And if we see further abuse of the system, of course, we’re prepared to act to do more. But when asked if he supported the measures that Robert Jenrick, the immigration minister, is reportedly proposing , such as a higher minimum salary threshold for people getting work visas, and a cap on the number of people getting NHS work visas, Sunak refused to answer, and largely just repeated what he had said already (quoted above).     Rishi Sunak being interviewed at the Nissan plant in Sunderland. Photograph: BBC News     block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.24am GMT block-time published-time 10.38am GMT   Sunak claims £2bn Nissan investment in Sunderland shows investors have confidence in government's economic strategy    Rishi Sunak has described the £2bn investment in the Nissan plant in Sunderland as evidence of the confidence that investors have in the government’s economic strategy. Speaking to the media as he visited the factory with Jeremy Hunt, the chancellor, Sunak said: We’ve just had a track record now of company after company committing to the UK … BMW, Stellantis, Tata with their largest investment outside of India that we announced earlier this year, and now here Nissan in Sunderland, our largest car manufacturer. All of them committing money to the UK, building the next generation of electric vehicles here in the UK, creating and safeguarding thousands of jobs across the UK. All of those companies think we’re doing the right thing, they actually welcome the changes that we made in the autumn statement recently to make sure that we cut taxes for businesses like this that are investing. They think we’ve got our strategy right as we approach net zero, and they think this is a fantastic place to be. They’re all voting with their feet. They’re putting money into the country, they’re creating jobs in the country. That’s a huge vote of confidence in this government’s economic strategy.      Rishi Sunak at the Nissan factory in Sunderland. Photograph: Ian Forsyth/AP      Rishi Sunak attaching a Nissan badge at the Nissan plant in Sunderland, with Jeremy Hunt alongside him. Photograph: Ian Forsyth/AP      Rishi Sunak with Nissan workers. Photograph: Ian Forsyth/Getty Images       block-time published-time 10.06am GMT  The Times has published a YouGov poll this morning, carried out on Wednesday and Thursday, suggesting support for the Conservatives is up four point on the previous week. It has them on 25%. With Labour unchanged at 44%,still 19 points ahead. enltrLabour lead down four to 19 points in latest YouGov poll for The Times CON 25 (+4) LAB 44 (=) LIB DEM 10 (=) REF UK 9 (-1) GREEN 7 (-1) Fieldwork 22 - 23 November pic.twitter.com/bPQZ94ZhgH  — Lara Spirit (@lara_spirit) November 24, 2023 In its story , the Times suggests the autumn statement announcements are responsible for this modest boost in Tory popularity. But psephology Twitter isn’t convinced. Will Jennings, an academic, says that talk of a four-point rise is misleading because the last YouGov poll, which had them on 21 points, was an outlier (making it an unreliable benchmark). enltrMove on, nothing to see here. pic.twitter.com/WhwEX1RlI9  — Will Jennings (@drjennings) November 23, 2023 Another poll out today, from Techne, which was also carried out on Wednesday and Thursday , has picked up no evidence of an autumn statement boost. enltrNEW POLL: Labour lead by 25 points: Lab: 46% (=) Con: 21% (-1) Lib Dem: 12% (+1) Reform: 8% (=) Green: 7% (=) SNP: 3% (=) Others: 3% (=) ?? 1,640 questioned. ??? +/- 14/15 Nov ?? Data https://t.co/70GPBMvAyN #Labour #Conservatives #LiberalDemocrats #ReformUK #GreenParty #SNP pic.twitter.com/yfXLWpXkto  — Techne UK (@techneUK) November 24, 2023 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.00am GMT block-time published-time 9.44am GMT   Cameron announces £30m more aid for Gaza ahead of meetings with Palestinian leaders    David Cameron, the foreign secretary, will meet with Palestinian leaders and commit a further £30m in aid  for people in Gaza following the announcement of a four-day ceasefire in the conflict in the Middle East, PA Media reports. PA says: The former prime minister is urging “all parties to continue to work towards the release of every hostage” after holding talks with Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and president, Isaac Herzog, during a visit to Israel yesterday. Today he will be in the occupied Palestinian territories, meeting Palestinian leaders and agencies delivering aid in Gaza, advocating adherence to the new agreement on all sides. The ceasefire was due to begin this morning, with aid “going in as soon as possible”, according to Qatari officials. The first set of civilians held captive by Hamas are expected to be freed at about 4pm on Friday local time, including 13 women and children. Cameron said: “We are hopeful that today will see the release of hostages, and I am urging all parties to continue to work towards the release of every hostage. A pause will also allow access for life-saving aid to the people of Gaza. “I am proud that a fourth UK flight carrying critical supplies landed in Egypt today, and I can announce new £30m of funding which will be spent on vital aid such as shelter and medical provisions. “It is vital to protect civilians from harm, and we are urgently looking at all avenues to get aid into Gaza, including land, maritime and air routes.” block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.56am GMT block-time published-time 9.25am GMT   Work and pensions secretary Mel Stride rejects claim that Hunt’s autumn statement means more austerity   Good morning. We are expecting to hear from Rishi Sunak this morning. He and Jeremy Hunt, the chancellor, are in the north-east of England on a visit linked to the announcement that Nissan is investing £2bn in its plant in Sunderland where three new electric car models will be made. Jasper Jolly has the story.  Related:  Nissan to build three new electric car models at Sunderland plant In a statement about this issued this morning, Sunak said: Nissan’s investment is a massive vote of confidence in the UK’s automotive industry, which already contributes a massive £71bn a year to our economy. This venture will no doubt secure Sunderland’s future as the UK’s Silicon Valley for electric vehicle innovation and manufacturing. Making the UK the best place to do business is at the heart of our economic plan. We will continue to back businesses like Nissan to expand and grow their roots in the UK every step of the way as we make the right long term decisions for a brighter future. But it is never easy to get the media to focus primarily on good news, and Sunak is instead likely to face questions about two of the much more tricky questions in his in-tray. First, if No 10 says net migration is “far too high” , what is he going to do about it? As Jamie Grierson reports, following the publication of figures yesterday saying net migration peaked at 745,000 in the year ending December 2022, Conservative MPs are furious  and demanding an immediate response. Robert Jenrick, the immigration minister, has drawn up plans for further restrictions, including lifting the annual salary required for people getting a work visa to £35,000. The BBC’s Chris Mason has the details.  Secondly, the debate about the merits of the autumn statement continues, particularly after the experts yesterday made it very clear that Hunt’s tax cuts are in effect funded by projected spending cuts that may be impossibly tight. As Richard Partington, Kiran Stacey and Phillip Inman report, the Institute for Fiscal Studies says these cuts would be worse than George Osborne’s austerity programme.  Related:  Hunt’s tax cuts mean austerity ‘more painful’ than under Osborne, warns IFS The government’s response has been to claim that it can cut spending on public services without making them worse by making them more efficient. In interviews this morning, Mel Stride, the work and pensions secretary, rejected claims that the autumn statement meant another round of austerity was coming. He told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: I really don’t see us going into any era of austerity, as you put it. I think there are two important points here. One is that in the autumn statement, the chancellor came forward with the kind of long-term thinking and actions now that will lead to greater business investment and growth in the economy going forward. For example, the 100% full expensing for investments makes us the most competitive destination for businesses out of the G7 and across the OECD. But secondly, we have to look at productivity. Public services aren’t all about just constantly spending ever more money. It is about the outputs. So John Glen [Cabinet Office minister], one of my very capable colleagues, and others across government, are absolutely engaged in a mission to improve productivity across the public sector. I believe it is the case that if we were to increase productivity by 0.5% for example, there wouldn’t be any further pressure on increases in taxes. So I think there is a huge amount we can do through productivity and investing in the long-term to get that growth going. We are expecting to hear from Sunak this morning. Otherwise, it looks quiet. The Commons is not sitting, and the diary is pretty empty. But David Cameron, the new foreign secretary, is still in the Middle East where today he will be in the occupied Palestinian territories, meeting Palestinian leaders and agencies delivering aid to Gaza. If you want to contact me, do try the “send us a message” feature. You’ll see it just below the byline – on the left of the screen, if you are reading on a laptop or a desktop. This is for people who want to message me directly. I find it very useful when people message to point out errors (even typos – no mistake is too small to correct). Often I find your questions very interesting, too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either in the comments below the line; privately (if you leave an email address and that seems more appropriate); or in the main blog, if I think it is a topic of wide interest. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.53pm GMT Load-Date: November 24, 2023  End of Document
