   Scotland will achieve much more when it is independent of dismal' union Aberdeen Press and Journal July 7, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 26 Length: 1281 words Byline: Struan Nimmo Body   Sir, - Regarding Willie Young's letter of July 1, I have to say his memory is really very bad. I have told him before I am not and never have been a member of the SNP nor indeed am I a member of any political party. In fact, I criticise the SNP when it is needed as strongly as anyone else, although I'll do it for good practical reasons not ideological ones. Yes, I support Scottish independence as indeed do many in his party, but I support it purely for economic, industrial, and societal reasons, not ideological ones. I just look at our peers such as Norway and Denmark in particular and can see better in almost every sector. As to his comment regarding the non-existent Scottish Energy Company, what I said in 2021 was in relation to what would be achievable with independence. I am acutely aware that the devolved Scottish Parliament simply doesn't have the powers to be able to achieve much more than acting as another energy reseller and that has, of course, been proven because they quite rightly decided not to proceed. But what I proposed is certainly not what Willie's Labour Party is proposing. Support for the development of meaningful Scottish renewables, technology and manufacturing supply chain hasn't even been mentioned. It won't be because along with many other Labour and Tory promises the economic havoc being caused by Brexit make it impossible. Ask anyone in Labour what benefit Scotland gets from Brexit and they simply ignore the question. And on the topic of Brexit, of course those supporting independence in 2014 wanted an independent Scotland within the EU and our preference for EU membership was made very clear in 2016 when more than 60% of voters supported remaining in the EU. That we have left is something Labour told us in 2014 would never happen, as indeed they told us Boris Johnson would never become prime minister. That, of course, was all part of the scam Labour pulled to keep us in this dismal and declining union. We won't fall for that again. Confidence in Keir Starmer? Only in his ability and speed to make U-turns. Dick Winchester, Aberdeenshire. Nationalist threat to Scottish unity Sir, - Plans by Orkney councillors to explore "alternative forms of government" (Press and Journal, June 30) should send a chill into the SNP ranks and not just the SNP. In fact, the breakaway prospect of the archipelago adopting the semi-detached status of the Channel Isles and the Isle of Man reveals a fundamental danger in the nationalists' ideology. Scotland is a small but diverse nation. The differences across the country include those of culture, demography, topography and more. The bulk of the population (and its electoral votes) resides in the densely-populated Central Belt, whereas the Highlands and Islands, along with the Borders region, have issues and challenges very different from their fellow Scots in the cities. At the time of the nationalist referendum in 2014, Orkney topped the list of those voting against independence. The next-to-top regions were the Scottish Borders, Dumfries and Galloway, and the Shetland Isles. What the voting count and the Orkney scenario illustrates is that there is no logical end to regional fracturing. If Scotland did become independent, the above-mentioned diversities would erupt into further division. Indeed, Shetland has much more affinity with Norway than it does with mainland Scotland; while the Borders regions will understandably have cross-border connections with England. And with the abysmal record of the SNP in just about all the main areas of life in Scotland, who, in the peripheral regions, wouldn't want shot of the present administration and its single-issue fixation? What we are faced with here is not nationalism, but the potential destruction of Scotland by its cause. Colin Wilson, Inverness. Maritime drive for net-zero shipping Sir, - Decarbonisation. A trendy buzzword, and one under discussion by the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC 80), part of the UN's International Maritime Organisation based in London. How can maritime transport reduce its carbon footprint? Commercial shipping emits as much carbon dioxide in one year as Germany but no target for reaching net zero has yet been set. More than £1 trillion of investment may be needed to decarbonise by 2050. Much research has been done but little progress has been made on the ground, or should that be the oceans? Wind propulsion (retractable kites for example), slow steaming to reduce fuel consumption, scrubbers to extract pollutants from smokestacks, waste heat recovery, energy storage by batteries, cold "ironing" where berthed vessels use shore-based electricity, solar power - all would help in reducing carbon emissions. But the promotion of alternative fuels will have the greatest beneficial effect - biodiesel, renewable gaseous fuels, "green" hydrogen produced by electrolysis for use in fuel cells or combustion engines are possibilities. Much infrastructure exists already but scalability and modifications are limiting factors. Research on other innovative fuels like dimethyl ether and highly toxic ammonia is ongoing. Ammonia combustion engines already exist. Bio-methanol is proven technology so new ships could rely totally on biofuels. MEPC 80 will formulate recommendations and challenges. Is net-zero by 2050 attainable by the shipping industry? I doubt it, but that's no reason for not making significant strides towards it. We are already experiencing extreme weather events resulting from climate change and efforts to mitigate global heating must continue on all fronts. Bill Maxwell, Keith. A9 policy change would save lives Sir, - If the Green Party were to abandon the A9 dualling project, this would mean that all the manpower and hours of hard work would have been for nothing. I'm hoping the Green Party will have a change of heart and not do away with the A9 project altogether, but carry on with it until it has been completed. The A9 dualling project will help save lives. Doesn't this count for something? Damien Goodwin, Inverness. We need debate and less vitriol Sir, - A new purpose, to encourage George Emslie to end his delusional ramblings, has entered my life. His latest tirade (Letters, July 1) disparages both the EU and Scottish nationalism, alongside an imperative to "get Brexit done." The EU has accepted the result of the 2016 referendum, and their acceptance is encapsulated in the Trading and Co-operation Agreement. The UK has procrastinated, while the EU has complied. It is spurious to compare Venezuela with either the EU or Scottish nationalism. Beset with hyperinflation, it's an "authoritarian regime". Brexit has made us poorer. The associated economic decline is like a "slow puncture." BrewDog's chief executive contends that Brexit has "massively handicapped" UK companies doing business in Europe with "zero benefit". Tory MP Tobias Ellwood advises that we must admit Brexit is a mistake and rejoin the single market. Governmental incompetence compounds the felony. Since 2016 sterling has fallen by 28% while prices have risen by 39%. An inflation rate of 8.7% hurts those with mortgages. The gap between richest and poorest widens while 700,000 households used foodbanks in 2019-20. Arguably, remaining part of the UK is not an attractive proposition but, given the recent UK Supreme Court decision, the SNP cannot exploit this opportunity in the foreseeable future. Handicapped by self-inflicted problems, support has been arrested. A recent survey revealed support for independence at 43% compared to 50% against. These are politically complex times deserving of considered analysis. Mr Emslie should appreciate that vitriol is no substitute for reasoned argument. Ian D. McCormick, Aboyne. Load-Date: July 7, 2023  End of Document
