   Sector workforce challenges needs political solution The Scottish Farmer June 2023  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved Length: 659 words Byline: Jim Millar Body   Jim Fairlie MSP looks at recruitment challenges facing industry Without question the past few years have been tough going for businesses who have faced a challenging environment most notably through Covid and Brexit. Everyday activities pre-pandemic are beginning to normalise as the severest restrictions and precautions come to an end, but unfortunately the impact of leaving the EU continues to have an impact on business health. The UK Government-s own Office for Budget Responsibility stated that the overall damage of Brexit is twice that of Covid. With EU membership Freedom of Movement ensured that citizens were able to freely move between the EU-s Member States, which in practice afforded businesses a continent-wide recruitment talent pool without consideration for bureaucratic hurdles or a burdensome visa process. Last Friday I was invited to meet with veg growers and NFU members, which are particularly reliant on migrant workers such as fruit pickers, to understand how their business has been affected by the change in recruitment practice. Contrary to Tory propaganda they unfortunately report a number of issues with the UK-s replacement Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme. Suella Braverman recently suggested that there -was no good reason- why the UK cannot train its own fruit pickers in a statement deemed -naive- and requiring -a move away from anti-migration politics and rhetoric to make good policy- by NFU Scotland Horticulture Chair Iain Brown. Despite industry expertise saying otherwise Tory politicians have been quick to back up the Home Secretary-s opinion and have looked to muddy the waters by presenting the idea that Scotland is an unappealing destination for migrants due to an apparent dislike of the SNP, rather than the reality of Brexit and unfriendly attitudes espoused by high profile Tories. Prior to Brexit businesses recruited people primarily from Eastern Europe, who typically had an agricultural background and found the transition to working the fields in Scotland an easy one to make. However, workers are now arriving from destinations such as Southeast Asia and West Africa, and whilst there is the relative attraction of income for them they are unprepared for the Scottish climate and cases have been reported of workers breaking off their contract early into the arrangement once enough income and other opportunities arise. Businesses go out of pocket and can-t reimburse that fee. The situation as stands suits nobody. Neither local businesses nor the workers are getting the best out of the Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme and with the allure of proximity to London seen as high value to those applying for a visa it is likely that the new arrangements will continue to be unworkable for the requirements of our fantastic horticulture businesses. Scotland absolutely needs the powers over migration to create policies that fit our unique circumstances. It is certainly not a case that it is the SNP at the root of the recruitment problem but rather the off putting and unappealing Brexit that has put off those sought by the agricultural, horticultural and hospitality sectors. How can the SNP be at fault when Scotland doesn-t even have the power to set migration policies? Scotland is a welcoming and inclusive country that was a happy home and workplace to many before the Tories introduced the unwelcoming and hostile Brexit, which has been followed up with nasty messaging over stopping boats. Ask yourself if you were a skilled EU migrant worker looking to make some money in an agricultural job would you pick the UK right now? Or would you go to France, Spain or Germany? My message to those politicians is instead of propaganda and defending the indefensible, join me in calling for the powers over migration to be transferred from Westminster to Holyrood. Give us the responsibility to create a welcoming migration policy that fits the needs of local businesses and Scotland as a whole. Load-Date: June 2, 2023  End of Document
