   Skin-deep success led to a £36mn sale; My First Million Joanna Jensen, founder of Childs Farm Financial Times (London, England) June 3, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Asian Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: MONEY;NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 1306 words Body   Joanna Jensen, 52, created family skincare brand Childs Farm in 2011, while trying to soothe her daughters' skin problems. Starting out from her Hampshire farmhouse, she built a successful business in the baby and child skincare market. Turnover went from £305,000 in 2011 to £17mn in 2021. Today, the Basingstoke company employs 35 staff. The company's baby moisturiser - a key product - took off in 2016 when a mother talked on social media about its fast-acting effects. In 2017, a bottle was being sold every 20 seconds in the UK. The entrepreneur who has survived divorce, major abdominal surgery and cervical cancer, sold just shy of 92 per cent of Childs Farm in March 2022 to consumer goods group PZ Cussons for £36.8mn. She retains a stake of just over 8 per cent. Interview by Nathalie Graham. Did you think you would get to where you are? At school I thought I would become an actress. I loved singing and musical theatre, but my mother considered a stage career risky. With hindsight I am not surprised where I am - I was a precocious, determined, conscientious child. I wasn't afraid of running a business when I set up my interior design venture at 21. After I had Bella [who suffered from eczema], I saw there were no natural products for sensitive skin. I had always been interested in skincare and conscious of which natural origin ingredients were suitable for young skin. I did my research at the kitchen table. I read enormous amounts of background material on ingredients and experimented myself, creating creams and lotions. Was your first £1mn a major milestone? It happened in 2018, but I didn't realise until I saw the year-end accounts in November. It was all a bit of a blur. We were so caught up in the pandemonium surrounding a social media post going viral that everyone was working flat out. Every moment was spent trying to source bottles, pumps and labels at breakneck speed, because we had to manage a 145 per cent increase in sales. Which was the greater challenge, Brexit, or the pandemic? Covid affected us much more than Brexit. Apart from Ireland, our international distribution was outside the eurozone, mainly Australia and the Middle East. We made sure that Ireland ordered stock before Brexit. If you have food with a sell-by-date within three days, Brexit has been painful for getting your products into Ireland. We have much more time. With cosmetics the shelf life is 36 months. The pandemic hit our UK manufacturing sites because we were a priority business. When the factory staff got ill with Covid, whole production lines were shut down. The manufacturer had to factor in delays due to lack of staff, so lead times went from six to 16 weeks. We faced enormous challenges with our supply chain. Sometimes you had stock and sometimes your stock production was let down at the last minute. Nothing ran smoothly. How have you coped with soaring energy costs? When Russia invaded Ukraine, our energy and logistics costs went up dramatically. We managed previous price rises throughout Covid, but this eroded our margins. In February 2022 we had to increase our recommended retail price from £4 to £4.50 across the range for a 250ml bottle. Was it a problem recruiting staff before the sale? It is always difficult in small and medium-sized businesses (SMEs). Though many candidates wanted to work from home, I think when you join an SME you need to be around the people you are working with for the best results. It was hardest to recruit marketing staff because they wanted to be based in London. What did you have to sacrifice to start the business? The biggest sacrifice was losing time with my children, who were two and four years old. I had to spend most of my disposable income on childcare while I researched the baby and child personal care market. I was also running the farmhouse as a bed-andbreakfast and renting out a big barn as a wedding venue. Until last year I worked at a very intense level. What was your best preparation for business? It was watching and learning from my grandparents, who ran a hugely successful antiques business in Hampshire. They lived and breathed it. They were Regency specialists and sold furniture to America. The shop was always open, and a hive of activity. I would often talk to the restorer on site and go to auctions. What is your basic business philosophy? First, turnover, turnover, turnover. If you don't have turnover, you have no business. Second, know your consumer. You have to know that what you are creating is what they want. You need to think like your consumer and be your consumer. This was not difficult for me, as I had two little ones with irritated skin. What was the toughest period of your career? I would say 2014, when I lost my home through divorce, and I lost a venture capital investor four days before they were due to sign. This meant I missed out on £3mn of growth capital. A few months later I had major abdominal surgery to remove a 2kg tumour. Though in great pain, I had to carry on. I remember creating shareholders' agreements from my hospital bed. Do you believe in leaving everything to your family? I believe everyone should make their own way in life, otherwise you don't know the value of money or the value of effort. I feel strongly about funding further education because I don't want my children to start their careers with debt. Will you carry on till you drop? No. When I sold to PZ Cussons in March 2022, I agreed I would retain a small stake in the business until June 2025, when I will be 55. Though I am committed to Childs Farm, I shall work out what I want to do over the next two years. It will include nonexecutive director roles, supporting female-founded businesses. I was looking for private equity investment to expand the business. When PZ Cussons expressed an interest to buy, it made an awful lot of sense. At the time I sold I had 25 shareholders, two of them significant, but I had the largest single shareholding. The sale has left me in a position where the chronic financial worry of the past 12 years is over. Cussons is focused on expanding Childs Farm internationally. Have you made any pension provision? Absolutely I have. I was an early adopter of paying into a private pension, at 21, and I did it throughout my career. I am glad I contributed so much, because it allowed me to lend the business 50 per cent of my fund when I needed capital. This was through a Small Self- Administered Scheme, a type of pension available for limited companies or partnerships. As a company director you have full discretion on how you invest your personal pension fund, either in your own business or commercial property. I don't think a lot of people are aware of this. My lifetime pension allowance, at just over £1mn, was maximised by 2021. Do you believe in giving something back to the community? I have always worked closely with the Riding for the Disabled Association, and in 2019 Childs Farm gave a substantial amount of money towards building their new head office in Worcestershire. I also support Paralympics GB, and own half a paralympics dressage horse with the rider Natasha Baker OBE. I have always adored horses and riding. I first sat in the saddle as a toddler as my mother was a show judge. Born: May 14 1970, near Bury St Edmunds. Education: 1986-88: Canford School, Dorset. Career: Age 18-21: Negotiator at lettings agent. Age 21-25: Ran interior design company for London investment properties 1994-98: Account manager for Asian Equities business W I Carr, Hong Kong 1998-2006: Investment banking roles with Paribas, and later UBS, in London 2008: Birth of Bella with atopic eczema 2011: Launched Childs Farm online, then independent retailers 2014: Nationwide distribution with Boots and Waitrose. Lives: Near Basingstoke with daughters Mimi, 17, and Bella, 14, and Jonathan Patrick, her partner. Graphic    Joanna Jensen: 'Covid affected us much more than Brexit' Charlie Bibby/FT Load-Date: June 2, 2023  End of Document
