   Taking control: Strange defenders of the nation, by Andy Robinson CE Noticias Financieras English July 16, 2023 Sunday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 895 words Body   The paradox of the European Union could not be greater: instead of giving rise to a Europeanist policy of cross-border tolerance and cosmopolitan liberal values, it has become a breeding ground for a visceral far-right nationalism. But contrary to what one might think, this ultra and populist nationalism does not seek to correct the loss of parliamentary sovereignty of their respective nations implicit in the EU project, especially for countries within the Eurozone. Quite the contrary. Aware that the British populist path of Brexit and leaving the EU cannot be followed, the European nationalist right focuses its attacks on the so-called culture wars, a superficial identity politics in areas such as gender, feminism and ethnic minority rights. The EU and the nationalist far right are in tandem, say the authors of a new book on Brexit.  These are the ideas put forward in a new book being discussed at conferences across the UK, titled "Taking Control," by a group of academics from leading University of London institutions such as University College and the London School of Economics (LSE). All are advocates of the possibilities created by Brexit to adopt alternative policies with a strong democratic mandate. "Hard right populism prefers a culture war rather than challenging the EU and its treaties that encapsulate what could be described as neoliberal policies: freedom of movement of capital, goods and labor," said Peter Ramsey, a law expert at the LSE, in an interview held after the book launch at the Liverpool Athenaeum earlier this month. "They complain about the EU - 'We're not going to accept it! Never!' - they insist, but when push comes to shove, they accept the technocrats' decision." It is a perfectly acceptable arrangement for the EU project which, far from being the construction of a superstate capable of smoothing out the imbalances of the European economy, is limited to moving economic and social policy decisions away from national parliaments. This fulfills the primary objective of the union: to advance economic liberalization to facilitate the movement of capital, goods and labor, according to the interests of powerful multinational corporations. If, to save this increasingly contested neoliberal project, it is necessary to turn national politics into a space of culture wars, variegated by flags, so be it. Hence Ramsey and his co-authors portray an extremist, populist right wing that serves as an alibi for the EU's economic project of shifting sovereignty from national parliaments to Brussels and Frankfurt. "No matter how nationalistic they want to appear whether in Madrid or Budapest, they cannot act in defense of national economic priorities because that is strictly forbidden," says Ramsey. Even in the area of immigration, xenophobia must be reconciled with the imperative of free movement of labor within the EU. In the UK, the Brexit debate addressed issues such as trade union rights for foreign workers and the importance of collective bargaining agreements in areas of free movement of labor. For the European nationalist right, all that remains is to imply the erection of walls on the borders of the EU. "They talk about the nation and how it has been under attack by the globalists, but they are unwilling to build a program that defends national sovereignty and therefore end up singling out immigrants and minorities as targets; the culture war is a substitute for a claim to true national sovereignty," Ramsey says. Since revisionist nostalgia for authoritarian regimes of the past is part of these culture wars in countries like Spain and Italy, the initial reasons for these countries joining the EU 30 or 40 years ago - the consolidation of democracy - have been strikingly reversed. Soon, the paradoxical culmination of this process may be reached, says Ramsey: "All European institutions may fall into the hands of the national populist right." A European project led by the ultra-nationalism of member countries is not as contradictory as it may seem, he continues: "The EU does not pretend to be a superstate; what it has done is to move the place where national governments make decisions from parliaments, where they must answer to voters, to closed-door meetings of councils of ministers." In this sense, "it's just a mechanism for the powers in the member states to bypass democratic processes; if things go wrong, it's easy to blame Europe when they actually made the decisions themselves in the council of ministers in rooms behind closed doors." The misrepresentation of Brexit in the political debate in countries like Spain is another component of this unnatural but symbiotic relationship between the EU and the nationalist far right. While in election campaigns in Europe, the left often highlights Brexit as an example of the dangers of ultra nationalism, the reality is otherwise, according to the authors of "Taking Control." The UK's exit from the EU has created a favorable political environment for political forces that are willing to seize the opportunity to regain popular sovereignty in social and economic areas. This creates more opportunities for a party interested in deepening democracy and breaking with the already challenged neoliberal order than the far right. "Right now, neither the Conservatives nor Labour want to seize the moment, but the opportunity is there," Ramsey said. Load-Date: July 18, 2023  End of Document
