   The opposition parties would relise Johnson's Tory return The Independent - Daily Edition June 15, 2023 Thursday First Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Print Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: VOICES; Pg. 23 Length: 551 words Body   Jacob Rees Mogg has suggested that Boris Johnson could "easily get back into parliament" at the next election, presumably by displacing an existing Tory MP from what is perceived to be a "safe seat". There must be one somewhere? His party can facilitate that; but why would they? They are already factionalised, fighting like rats in a sack, and the public is well aware of their disunity. Johnson is a loser who has by his own volition cut and run from parliament. How exactly would his reintroduction to parliament prove advantageous to a Tory party likely to be significantly reduced in number at the next general election? His lies can no longer not turn them into winners. From his party's perspective, looking for a good reason for his return is rather like trying to identify a Brexit benefit. Both are a mistake requiring correction. The chaotic Tory party appear unelectable and a reintroduction of Johnson - an architect of chaos - would not help their cause. It is likely to be relished elsewhere. David Nelmes Newport <strong>Another day, another Brexit blame!</strong> The Covid inquiry lead counsel, Hugo Keith KC, blames Brexit for the unpreparedness of the UK during the pandemic. But didn't it also affect the USA, Brazil, Italy, France, and India? Apparently not! Besides, research company Statista has confirmed that the EU capital, Belgium, was the worst affected Euro nation. Furthermore, even EU Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier admitted that the world-class vaccine programme rolled out by the UK trumped that of his bloc. Some Remainers blame Brexit when it rains on their summer barbecues. It is about time they ceased this outrageous attitude. Jim Sokol Minehead <strong>Oh Lordy! </strong> Is it not now the opportunity for Keir Starmer to make some sort of statement on the Lords and the nonsense of the honours system? We have a wreck of an institution at the centre of our political system which is both unsafe and unhealthy. We need a radically different entity to truly achieve the levelling up of this country, which has never been taken seriously. The concept of a chamber full of cronies who pay enough money for political favours is offensive to the vast majority of the British people. What about young people, who will be the future of Britain? They need a voice. Why not an upper chamber of the youth? Alastair Duncan Address Supplied <strong>Blame can be laid at the Tory's door</strong> David Campbell Bannerman, chair of the Conservative Democratic Organisation, and Claire Bullivant, CEO, seem to conclude the Tory government ought to have been left to mismanage as they saw fit. Misguided, devalued illusionists of the CDO need to look at the shameful way that Britain has been let down by the Tory party, and particularly Boris Johnson. He has brought British politics into disrepute and wrecked the economy by deceitfully taking us out of the European Union. The current upheaval in transport, travel, NHS, care services, food deprivation and more can be laid fairly at the door of the Tory party. It is shameful that this government has been allowed to ride roughshod over the rule of law which has reduced Britain to the current state of chaos we are experiencing. Never again must British people allow the excesses of the past few years to happen again. Keith Poole Basingstoke Load-Date: June 14, 2023  End of Document
