   The tragedy is he didn't realise he would never be forgiven for Brexit; Former PM has very good judgment - except sometimes where his own personal interests are concerned, recalls David Frost The Sunday Telegraph (London) June 11, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 1939 words Byline: David Frost Body   This is no funeral oration. I come to praise Boris Johnson, not to bury him. True, he is leaving Parliament, but only, as he himself says, "for now". Even though he already has all the glittering prizes - editor of The Spectator, Mayor of London, foreign secretary and prime minister - I doubt the story is over. Many people assume that Boris and I go back a long way. We don't. We were at Oxford at the same time, but never in the same circles. But our paths did cross in Brussels in the early 1990s when I was at the UK Mission and he was the Telegraph correspondent, launching attack after attack on the regulatory excesses of the Commission. His colourful reporting about bent bananas captured a truth about the European Union - that it was set on a direction which, unless softened or halted, would in the end prove impossible for Britain to live with. It turned out we both thought that - and we would both come together, 25 years later, to get us out for good. Over all that time, of course, Boris was developing the star quality and the public persona that would take him all the way to the top. His capacity to absorb criticism and connect with the audience on Have I Got News for You?, in the days when it was funny, was perhaps the first sign that we had a genuine political talent as well as a great writer. That talent took him through the ups and downs of his time as MP for Henley, and then to the great opportunity of Mayor of London. Boris won that election in 2008, and again in 2012, by running as a fundamentally optimistic outwardlooking politician. He neutralised the Labour attack, not for the last time, by his enthusiasm and his amazing ability to communicate. He will be seen as a great Mayor; indeed, the appalling Sadiq Khan administration shows every day what we are missing. He drove through the Elizabeth Line when many, especially in the Treasury, would happily have canned it. He helped show off London to the world in the 2012 Olympics. But he also realised what many ordinary Londoners wanted, which was a safe environment, and delivered it. Crime fell by 20 per cent during his tenure and the murder rate almost halved. Then came the Brexit wars. Returning as MP for Uxbridge in west London, Boris became the leading light of the Leave campaign. Even now many see this as a careerist move. I don't believe it for a moment. Anyone who reads the two draft articles he wrote at the time can see that the Leave version is far more convincing and persuasive than Remain. Leave would not have won the referendum without him. Had he not been taken out by Michael Gove in those crazy days after 23 June 2016, the country would undoubtedly have been spared the long ghastly interlude of Theresa May's premiership, the gradual erosion of our negotiating position, including the catastrophic concessions on Northern Ireland, and the final near-disastrous breakdown of our constitutional norms. Boris was, of course, Foreign Secretary while all that was happening. That's when I first worked closely by his side. He needed someone who knew the Foreign Office but believed in Brexit and could help develop a new vision for British foreign policy. We got some way down that road, but became distracted by the slow-motion disaster of the Brexit talks. Although it's commonly believed that Boris undermined Theresa May, he trusted her for far too long, and only realised he had to resign when he realised that her negotiation would not restore national independence and control but instead leave us trapped. As foreign secretary, Boris deserves more credit than he often gets. It's true, perhaps, that he wasn't then a great foreign policy thinker. He was often excessively influenced by cautious, sometimes unreconciled, foreign office mandarins, a trap he had learnt to avoid by the time of the crucial decisions on Ukraine in early 2022. But he had amazing ability to get on with people, to strike up relationships with the most unlikely interlocutors, and to fly the flag, which he did all round the world. And he got serious when the situation demanded it, as after the Salisbury poisonings where he drove through the diplomatic effort that was in retrospect the first real Western pushback against Russian aggression. It also helped that he had real star quality. He was far more famous and recognisable than the prime minister herself, a reality of which the Theresa May team was uncomfortably aware as they nervously watched every overseas visit. I visited every continent with Boris and there was no place where we couldn't get out of the car and within five minutes be surrounded by an adoring crowd wanting a selfie. It was along time since Britain had commanded so much interest and attention. It came to an end, temporarily, in July 2018. For a time after his resignation, I think he thought his career was over. But Theresa May's determination to persist with her dreadful Brexit approach - characteristically colourfully described by Boris as having "wrapped a suicide vest around the British constitution, and handed the detonator to Michel Barnier" - gave him his way back. He mobilised opposition and, in the end, drove her from office. I returned to No10 with him when he became prime minister. Boris's supreme achievement will be, with the support of Dominic Cummings and others, to have forced through a plan to cut through the constitutional crisis, break the impasse in the negotiations, give us freedom for the future about our relationship with the EU, and, in the end, win the biggest majority, capturing many Labour strongholds, of any Conservative prime minister since Lady Thatcher over 30 years earlier. We then used that negotiating strength to get, in 10 months, the free-trade agreement that world-weary commentators had said would take 10 years. We achieved that because everyone knew Boris and I were of one mind on EU policy, and because he was perfectly prepared to walk away from the talks if the deal wasn't right. As we always said, hardball tactics, courteously but firmly expressed, produced the right result. But, of course, by then Covid had hit us. A Boris government without the pandemic is one of the great mighthave-beens of British politics, as is the outcome if Boris had stuck to his judgment and pursued the Swedenstyle approach that Iam confident he instinctively preferred. The vaccine rollout will, of course, always be a huge achievement. But once we had decided on the first lockdown, the government was locked in. Boris never developed a mechanism within the government machine which would give him the evidence to insist on his own convictions. That is why we got stuck in the repeated cycle of further lockdowns, culminating in the near-shutdown of Christmas 2021, the issue over which I left his government. By then, of course, partygate was beginning to overwhelm him. Few political declines can have come so fast as that between the October 2021 Conservative party conference and his eventual departure in July, just nine months later. There's no doubt it would have been better if Boris had investigated more fully sooner, explained what happened and accepted his own responsibility more quickly, and disciplined those involved appropriately. But he never realised the consequences of being so disliked by so much of the establishment and the media and didn't grasp the magnitude of the problem until too late. In the end the coordinated campaign against him, a tsunami of confected hysteria, overwhelmed him. Now Boris has gone as an MP too, once again to a chorus of scorn from all the sensible people in government and media who, until 2016, thought they were safely in charge. I don't recognise the real Boris, the Boris I knew, in all this outrage and disdain. The man I worked with is the one who took a risk to get us out of the EU and did so, and who stuck to his principles about a real www.Brexit.No one else could have done it. He is the man who got the judgment call right on Ukraine. And, for all the problems over Covid policy, his instincts were mostly against restrictions, and we came out of the madness sooner than most. He actually has very good judgment - except perhaps sometimes where his own personal interests are concerned - but he too often wrongly deferred to many of the people around him who didn't have his best interests at heart. I will also think of the human Boris which few outsiders saw. A man of restless intellectual curiosity, with a huge hinterland of interests. A kind man, a man who did not hold grudges, a man who rarely blames the people around him even when they are obviously responsible for failures, and a man who, unlike so many prime ministers, is in no way pompous, remembers everyone, however junior, and treats everyone the same whatever their role. Every prime minister has weaknesses. Boris's tragedy is that he didn't seem to realise that he would never be forgiven for delivering Brexit and how much he was disliked as a result. He gave his critics too much needless ammunition and, by failing to sort out partygate early on, never got a chance to deal with those weaknesses and move on. His message yesterday on standing down from Uxbridge calls for a "properly conservative government". Everyone has their own definition, it seems, nowadays, of what that means. But it certainly must include economic liberalism, low taxes and spending, openness to trade, and economic reform and deregulation. Boris believes in that - look at his 2018 party Conference speech if you doubt it - and would have delivered more of it if the pandemic had not intervened and if he had had more people around him who wanted it too. I wish he had been less mesmerised by net zero and less ready to rely on a stuttering Civil Service instead of a proper machine made up of people he really trusted. Nevertheless, his nearly three years in office make him the most important prime minister so far of this century and the most consequential Conservative prime minister since Lady Thatcher. It was a bumpy ride but few prime ministers faced such daunting challenges. Through them all he maintained his connection to voters, who sensed perhaps that his iconoclastic approach and support for genuine change was preferable to the alternative of dry managerialism and steady-as-she-goes politics. Even now, despite everything, Boris is 10 percentage points more popular than Rishi Sunak among Leave voters and 2019 Tory voters. Fewer than half of our 2019 supporters, and only just over a quarter of Leave voters, are still planning to vote for us. The 2019 coalition has collapsed and there is no sign of it recovering. NEAL LEON AUGSTEIN, FRANK GETTY, MIAH/ KOIS I will happily remember many things about my time with Boris. One that sticks in the mind is a visit to Japan as Foreign Secretary. The Embassy had organised a photo-op for Boris in a car dealership with a new electric supercargo partly made in Britain. Boris duly sat in the driver's seat. Photos were taken. Then, without warning anyone, he pressed the accelerator and simply drove of. f. Pursued by agitated British officials and Japanese auto executives, he disappeared with the million-pound uninsured vehicle into the six lanes of Tokyo traffic. We didn't know where he would come back, or when, or in what state. Of course, he showed up five minutes later, unharmed, exhilarated, to the relief of all concerned. ALAMY, WESTMACOTT/ EDD PARSONS, This time, too, we don't know where he will be back or when. But I'm sure the story is not over. ANDREW 'A kind man, a man who did not hold grudges, who rarely blames the people around him, who is in no way pompous, and treats everyone the same' Graphic    Boris Johnson, prime minister at the time, and his partner Carrie Symonds, now his wife, watch the 2019 election results on television in his study at No10, right. And below, from the left, Mr Johnson as editor of the Spectator magazine in 2003; suspended on a Load-Date: June 11, 2023  End of Document
