   The party's over now: Johnson quits as MP; Ex-PM faced by-election for misleading Commons The Times (London) June 10, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,2 Length: 815 words Byline: Steven Swinford ; Oliver Wright Body   Boris Johnson stood down as an MP last night and launched a blistering attack on Rishi Sunak's government after an investigation found that he misled parliament over the Downing Street parties scandal. The former prime minister accused the privileges committee of "egregious bias" after it recommended that he should be suspended for more than ten days, which would be enough to trigger a by-election. Johnson decided instead to resign as Tory MP for Uxbridge & South Ruislip with immediate effect, accusing the committee of mounting a "witch-hunt" and describing it as a "kangaroo court". He said that the cross-party group of seven MPs, the majority of whom are Conservative, was "determined to use the proceedings against me to drive me out of parliament", which he said set an "unsettling" and undemocratic precedent. In the statement Johnson also issued a vitriolic attack on Sunak as he accused him of abandoning the pledges on which he had won the 2019 election. He called for cuts to business and personal taxes and for the party to make the most of Brexit, adding: "We must not be afraid to be a properly Conservative government." He accused Sunak, in effect, of betraying his legacy, claiming that he had "passively abandoned" a free-trade deal with the US and "junked" policies, including support for firsttime homebuyers, a bonfire of EU laws and new legislation to protect animals. "Our party needs urgently to recapture its sense of momentum and its belief in what this country can do," he said. "We need to show how we are making the most of Brexit and we need in the next months to be setting out a pro-growth and pro-investment agenda. We need to cut business and personal taxes - and not just as pre-election gimmicks - rather than endlessly putting them up. "We need to deliver on the 2019 manifesto, which was endorsed by 14 million people. We should remember that more than 17 million voted for Brexit." Johnson's departure will trigger a byelection in his seat, which he held with a 7,000 majority at the last election and was already high on Labour's target list. The Tories will also have to defend Nadine Dorries's Mid Bedfordshire seat after she also resigned earlier in the day having not been given a peerage on Johnson's prime ministerial resignation honours list, published yesterday. Johnson indicated that he is planning Continued on page 2 continued from page 1 Johnson quits as MP to return to politics and said that he had left parliament only "for now at least". The Conservative Party is expected to block him from standing in Dorries's seat because it wants a local candidate. In Johnson's resignation list, more than 40 of his closest aides and allies were given honours and peerages, including several implicated in the Downing Street parties scandal. Johnson also knighted the former cabinet ministers Jacob Rees-Mogg, Priti Patel and Simon Clarke and handed peerages to Downing Street aides. The former prime minister claimed that the privileges committee had been determined to force him out of parliament. "Their purpose from the beginning has been to find me guilty, regardless of the facts. This is the very definition of a kangaroo court," he said. "I believe that a dangerous and unsettling precedent is being set." Johnson said the report he had received from the committee was "riddled with inaccuracies and reeks of prejudice but under their absurd and unjust process I have no formal ability to challenge anything they say". "The privileges committee is there to protect the privileges of parliament. That is a very important job. They should not be using their powers, which have only been very recently designed, to mount what is plainly a political hitjob on someone they oppose," he said. "It is in no one's interest, however, that the process the committee has launched should continue for a single day further. "So I have written to my association in Uxbridge and South Ruislip to say I am stepping down forthwith and triggering an immediate by-election." He suggested he was a victim of his enemies taking "revenge for Brexit", adding: "It suits the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats, and the SNP to do whatever they can to remove me from parliament. Sadly, as we saw in July last year, there are some Tory MPs who share that view. I am not alone in thinking there is a witch-hunt under way, to take revenge for Brexit and ultimately to reverse the 2016 referendum result." But one senior Tory accused Johnson of bad faith, pointing out that he had approved the committee process, including the appointment of Harriet Harman as the chairwoman when he was prime minister. The source said: "It's all very well accusing them of conducting a witchhunt now that they have found against him but if he thought the process was unfair or the MPs on the committee would be biased why didn't he raise that at the time?" Gongs "a reward for failure", pages 6-7 Load-Date: June 10, 2023  End of Document
