   The musician who played against Brexit and believes that Artificial Intelligence cannot compose with emotion. CE Noticias Financieras English June 12, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1488 words Body   Evidently the relationship between the Argentine public and Snarky Puppy is much more than a love affair. Between the shows they have given at Niceto, the Konex and the Teatro Colón, plus the sensational two dates at Café Berlín and the tour of Neuquén and Córdoba given by the duo formed by the bassist and leader of the Michael League collective together with the multi-awarded London pianist Bill Laurance and these new presentations of the latter together with his trio repeating dates at Café Berlín (June 13 and 14, tickets through Livepass), it is clear how special our country is for these artists. A global musician, a versatile creator of infinite climates depending on the project he is working on, Bill Laurance has a remarkable ability to communicate, often achieving close and pleasant music based on instrumentations that could be seen as complex or grandiloquent. Within his purely musical character, it is worth noting his simplicity to develop harmonic frameworks of great flight, but without losing the hook to the earth, the groove or the rhythmic format that always sustains his compositions, whether this is approached by percussion instruments (with his trio or as a soloist accompanied by many of the musicians of Snarky Puppy) or by string ensembles as in his magnificent collaboration with The Untold Orchestra. Musician and activist Before his new presentations in Buenos Aires in less than a month, Clarín chatted with an affable Laurance who was willing to open up about his different projects, his experiences touring our country and his incisive activist character. -You have released some very different albums in the last three years, what drives you to keep exploring new sounds with different kinds of formations? -Changing the forms of my music is what keeps me inspired. Changing the context of composition enables new approaches to the writing process. My most recent project is with a string orchestra in which I made the conscious decision to remove the trio, so it's just strings and piano, no rhythm section. Therefore, immediately the strings had to take a very rhythmic role, so I created my most classical/contemporary album to date. It has a big influence from (pianist and composer) Steve Reich with a lot of the rhythm coming from the strings. That back and forth has to do with finding a way to stay inspired. -What do you like most about playing with Marijus and Max? How would you define the power, the virtues of this trio? -We have been working together for almost three years. With Marijus twice as long, in fact. My music is so diverse and encompassing in terms of styles, so I need musicians who can cover that whole spectrum and these two have that condition. Max is an amazing double bass player, he also plays synthesizers and electric bass, and his sense of groove is really wonderful, very communicative. Marijus is similar in that he covers a great breadth of styles and is like a fireman when it comes to interacting with the audience. He knows very well what it's like to play simple and repetitive, he's very good at doing hip hop or electronica, a style he loves. The idea is to have the ability to embrace completely diverse music. On the other hand, our chemistry is growing and we are in our best moment with a lot of desire to get on stage. -You spoke out against Brexit and did an improvisation concert guided by your feelings about it. How difficult was it to create a political statement without words, just through sounds?  I felt very strongly about the whole thing, it was devastating when we voted to leave the European Union and I tried to express myself as much as I could, particularly to highlight how close we came to staying. I like to speak for the 48% who wanted to stay, because I'm sure a lot of people in Europe just know that we chose to leave, but it's important for them to know that we came very close to staying. I know it was a disaster, a tremendous mistake, and hopefully there is ever a chance to come back. Regarding expressing this point of view through instrumentation: and yes, it's complicated without words, but that's why it's important for me to present the songs and tell where the inspiration comes from, what the story behind it is. Sometimes you don't need to talk so much, but I'm definitely trying to be more vocally expressive, because it's very important that these messages come through clearly, especially for the new generations. As I become a father of three children I become more and more aware of how important it is to stay active for the things we believe in. -In relation to this, how do you think musicians were influential in raising awareness of this political situation in the UK? -I feel that musicians were very present in this trying to show that Brexit is a waste of time. Damon Albarn, for example, or Matthew Herbert, who did some brilliant work inspired by the Brexit. That's what I'm trying to do: use music as a platform to raise awareness about these things, it's a responsibility, whether you're an artist or not, you have to take that responsibility, it's the only way things will change. Maybe something like Brexit is what will wake up the next generation and make them realize that we have to be more activist. That's what I will do with my next projects, be more verbal in these aspects. What you bring to Argentina -We recently enjoyed your music as part of Snarky Puppy and also with your duo with Michael League. What Bill Laurance will we see with his trio? -I think it's good to come with Snarky first and then come back soon with my solo project. This project is obviously much more personal, all the compositions and arrangements are mine, it's material I've been working with for years, so I think what you'll get is the most genuine version of me and my music. But I am by nature a collaborator, so my work with Snarky and with Michael feeds into what I do as a solo artist. You can expect music from my entire catalog, old and new songs, even my Affinity solo piano work. I hope that when people leave they get the feeling that they've enjoyed a seven-step dinner. That it's an opportunity to get out of the monotony and get lost in the music. For me it's ideal to feel like I reach a level of elevation where I look at my hands and feel the music come out on its own. Somehow, to feel a higher power take my hands and play that music. I'm not someone who is necessarily religious, but I feel that music has the power to do this and that's my goal for every show. -How would you sum up your recent experience of playing in Argentina?  There is an undeniable passion when it comes to Argentina. I don't know if it has to do with tango or soccer or what, but you can really feel that energy, whether it's walking down the street or on stage. And I also feel that music is in the blood of this continent and you can always feel that when you play. It seems that the music is accepted and appropriated by the audience on a very deep level. That relates directly to how we play or what repertoire we play. Our commitment to the music increases when we play in this part of the world. It's very inspiring, it makes me want to find a deeper version of our music because we know it will be appreciated. And as far as attention levels, people really listen here. They really engage with what's happening on stage and you can feel that. -With such an eclectic lineup and being such a prolific band, does Snarky Puppy function as a workshop? -Yes. With so many people from so many different backgrounds, there's no ceiling on what you can learn from being in that band, whether it's on or off stage. On the tour bus we're always passing each other new music. It's a collective of incredibly capable musicians, a wonderful cauldron of breeds that I've learned so much from over the last 20 years. And it was also super important for me to feel supported by everyone in the band, which gave me the confidence to go my own way. I was able to work and explore my own sound a lot. A lot of what I practiced in Snarky I developed on another level with my trio, but in both projects, what we want is to create a unique moment every night for our audience. -You're a person who is very interested in technology. The question is obvious: how do you see Artificial Intelligence - solution or threat for musicians and artists in general? -The way everything is evolving is alarming in some ways. How fast everything is going, mostly thanks to social networks, is worrying, but at the end of the day it's something we have to accept because it seems inevitable. So we will have to find a way to use it. I'm not too worried about the idea of Artificial Intelligence replacing composers, maybe it can happen in terms of incidental music, but when it comes to composing based on emotions I think robots will never be able to understand how to do it. That's what gives us a plus, a superiority to artists that I hope will remain forever. WD Load-Date: June 13, 2023  End of Document
