   THERE WAS » » AS NO PLAN; LAWYER FOR FAMILIES SLAMS 'EMPTY WORDS OF SYMPATHY' »» Sturgeon blasted by Covid victim's dad as she admits government were unprepared for pandemic »» Former first minister is pulled up by barrister over political rant rather than fielding inquiry's questions Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 30, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 4,5 Length: 990 words Byline: ANDREW QUINN Body   A MAN whose son died alone during the pandemic blasted Nicola Sturgeon yesterday after she admitted Scotland had "no plan" for a Covid outbreak. Alan Inglis, 53, said he felt "let down" after listening to the former first minister answer questions on how the Scottish Government prepared for the outbreak. In her first major assignment since her arrest in the SNP finance probe, Sturgeon and former deputy John Swinney were grilled at the UK Covid Inquiry in London. In a shock admission Sturgeon said there was "thinking" in the Scottish Government around a non-flu infectious disease pandemic but added: "What there wasn't, and I think this is the significant gap, is a set plan. "The questions in my mind, literally every day, are not so much, 'Did we lack a plan?' but, 'Did we lack capabilities for dealing with a pandemic of the nature of Covid-19?' "And obviously I'm talking there about contact tracing, testing and infrastructure in particular." Sturgeon said she "deeply regrets" having to divert resources from emergency planning to prepare for the possibility of a no-deal Brexit. She added: "We had no choice but to do that planning. I deeply regret any consequences that had for our emergency planning in other areas." Scottish Covid Bereaved families were in London to listen to the first minister's evidence. Among them was Alan Inglis, from Linlithgow, West Lothian, whose 34-year-old son Calum died at HMP Addiewell just 12 days after testing positive for Covid in 2021. He said: "There was an awful lot of information given out and a lot of the answers were skirted around. I would have preferred clearer yes/no answers. I feel let down." Telling how his son died in prison, he added: "Calum was an inmate at Addiewell. He became unwell and sought medical assistance. "He was tested for Covid and returned a positive result. He was isolated in his cell but deteriorated and sought further medical assistance. "He was given paracetamol. He deteriorated further and asked again for further assistance which wasn't given - he asked for help but no one came. He was found unresponsive in his cell shortly after, 14 days after contracting Covid. "My son died alone in a prison cell on Nicola Sturgeon's watch, I don't need experts to tell me how he should have been treated."UK Covid Inquiry KC Hugo Keith asked Sturgeon if planning for a no-deal Brexit instead of "the greatest risk which the country faced, the tier one influenza pandemic" was a "false economy". She replied: "I don't disagree with that. I think every aspect of Brexit has been a false economy." Keith then gave the former first minister a telling-off. He said: "Miss Sturgeon, I'm so sorry, that is a witness box, not a soap box. We cannot allow any of the political debate of Brexit." When asked if it was correct that there was no plan for a non-influenza pandemic, she said: "That is absolutely the case." She claimed there was "a real danger in putting an overemphasis on plans" which "sit on the shelf ". Sturgeon said: "I think there's a real danger in putting an overemphasis on plans. There is often a tendency in government to say, 'Well, we have a plan, it sits on the shelf and so we've done the preparation.' "It's what lies underneath that [is important]." Sturgeon is also due to appear in the inquiry's next module, when it moves on to government responses to the pandemic, which is likely to include the Scottish Government's role in multiple care home deaths. Lawyer Aamer Anwar, representing the Scottish Covid Bereaved, said Sturgeon had given "empty words of sympathy" and accused those who have given evidence so far of "denial, arrogance and blaming everyone else but themselves". Anwar said afterwards: "For many of the Covid Bereaved the evidence of multiple politicians and senior civil servant has exposed a culture of impunity, denial, arrogance and blaming everyone else but themselves. More than 227,000 people lost their lives in the UK to Covid and by March 2022, 13,429 had lost their lives to Covid in Scotland. "The dead cannot speak for themselves but their families deserve the truth." He added: "The families want to know whether the Scottish Government blames Westminster or if they were in agreement? Did they fail to follow the science? "Or did they march a few steps behind Boris Johnson into his carousel of chaos? "The families watched Miss Sturgeon and Mr Swinney give evidence but they want more than empty words of sympathy. "They hope that ministers and civil servants finally admit their mistakes and work together to prepare us for the next inevitable pandemic. "The families simply want truth and accountability - and today is just the start." Scottish Government made mistakes Nicola Sturgeon said the Scottish Government tried its best during the pandemic but admitted that it "did not get everything right". She also offered her "sympathies and condolences" to all those who had www.suffered.No plan for a non-flu pandemic Sturgeon admitted the Scottish Government had not had a plan in place for a pandemic that was not flu. She said this did not mean THERE WAS » » "no thinking" about the possibility of one. Brexit harmed readiness Sturgeon blamed the prospect of a no-deal Brexit for there being no proper plan in place. She said she regretted "diverting resources from other priorities" but said THERE WAS » » "little alternative". Sturgeon told off by lawyer the former first minister was told off by Hugo Keith KC for calling Brexit a "false economy". The lawyer told her she was in a "witness box, not a soap box. ". Scottish Covid Bereavednot satisfied Their lawyer, Aamer Anwar, said Sturgeon's appearance at the hearing "raised more questions than answers" and that the bereaved families "want more than empty words of sympathy. ". Bereaved dad Alan Inglis said he felt "let down" after Sturgeon "skirted around" with her answers. There is a danger in an overemphasis on plans" which "sit on the shelf ". NICOLA STURGEON AT THE INQUIRY Graphic    SEARCH FOR JUSTICE Left, Alan with son Calum. Above with lawyer Anwar Load-Date: June 30, 2023  End of Document
