   Truss demands for immediate tax cuts and house-building win Farage's support The Daily Telegraph (London) October 3, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4,5 Length: 2678 words Byline: Dominic Penna; Charles Hymas;Ewan Somerville; Genevieve Holl-Allen; Nick Gutteridge; Jack Simpson Body   LIZ TRUSS yesterday called on Jeremy Hunt to cut taxes immediately as she was backed by Nigel Farage. The former prime minister urged Mr Hunt to reduce corporation tax to 19 per cent or below as she addressed a grassroots meeting at the Conservative Party conference in Manchester. Ms Truss had pledged to undo a rise in corporation tax from 19 to 25 per cent during her tenure in Downing Street last year but reinstated it in the wake of negative reaction to her mini-Budget. The increase took effect in April. Arguing that the Tories must once again become the "party of business", Ms Truss told the Great British Growth Rally: "That is why I am calling upon the Chancellor at the Autumn Statement to put corporation tax back down to 19 per cent. And frankly if we can get it lower, the better." Asked why he had decided to show up to Ms Truss's talk, Mr Farage, the former Ukip leader, replied: "I absolutely, 100 per cent believe in her." " Accusing Tory MPs of making a "huge mistake" by ousting her last October, Mr Farage added: "It's policy that interests me. I think this woman has shown that she's able to stand up, take the abuse andfight for what she believes in." Referencing the Morecambe and Wise sketch, he joked the ill-fated mini- Budget saw Ms Truss "playing all the right notes, just not in the wrong order". Under Rishi Sunak and Mr Hunt, the tax burden is at its highest postwar level, but the Chancellor has ruled out tax cuts at the Autumn Statement, insisting the Government must focus on halving inflation. John Glen, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, suggested in an interview yesterday that tax cuts could come before a general election in the Budget early next year. "Obviously there will be a Budget in the spring of next year and we will look sympathetically at what we can do to create those conditions for growth in the economy." " Elsewhere in her remarks, Ms Truss called on ministers to build 500,000 new homes a year in order to easefinancial pressures on households and help spur economic growth. "We need to incentivise local areas to build more homes through giving them tax breaks if they are prepared to get rid of that red tape. I think we need to do it at a level where we are building 500,000 new homes every year. I think that is the state we are now in. The prices are so high, the cost of living is so difficult for families that we need to build 500,000 homes every year." Ms Truss was joined at the rally by Dame Priti Patel, Sir Jacob Rees-Mogg and Ranil Jayawardena, all former cabinet ministers on the economic Right of the party. Dame Priti, a former home secretary, appeared to criticise Rishi Sunak and Mr Hunt for "just accepting big government" as she called for a more libertarian approach. "We need to get growth back. We cannot be timid any more, we cannot be risk-averse and we cannot accept the status quo," Dame Priti said. Mr Jayawardena, the co-chairman of the Conservative Growth Group of Tory backbenchers who support Ms Truss's small state agenda, announced in his speech the caucus now has more than 60 members. A separate fringe meeting saw Miriam Cates, co-chairman of the New Conservatives group of backbenchers, tell activists that Britain remained in "the shackles of European law and Blairite law" despite four years of Tory rule. "We've seen taxes and immigration rise to unsustainable levels and we've seen our children spend longer than ever in education but emerging in debt, less skilled and increasingly indoctrinated with destructive ideas," Ms Cates said. Hunt plans 63,000 Civil Service job cuts Jeremy Hunt has told ministers to draw up plans to reduce the size of the civil service by 63,000 people to save £1billion a year. In a speech lasting only 14 minutes, the Chancellor said he would like to see fewer diversity and inclusion staf f who spread "woke" values around Whitehall. He told delegates at the Tory conference that he would extend a recruitment freeze for the Civil Service, and said that, on top of this, each department would have to put forward plans to reduce the number of officials they employ. The aim is to cut the Civil Service to its pre-pandemic size, from 457,000 now to 394,000 - a reduction of about 15 per cent. It means there will be 63,000 fewer officials, although it is not planned to make any compulsorily redundancies. Mr Hunt said departments would also have to carry out an audit of inclusion staf f to ensure they were needed. There are about 10,000 such staf fin Whitehall. "We have the best civil servants in the world and they saved many lives in the pandemic by working night and day. But even after that pandemic ... we still have 63,000 more civil servants than before ... So, today I'm freezing the expansion of the Civil Service and putting in place a plan to reduce its numbers to pre-pandemic levels." He added: "If we increase public-sector productivity growth by just half a per cent, we can stabilise public spending as a proportion of GDP. Increase it by more and we can bring the tax burden down." Dave Penman, general secretary of the FDA union, which represents senior civil servants, said Mr Hunt's announcement was "intellectually bereft". Mobile phone ban 'will make pupil behaviour worse' Teaching unions have claimed the Education Secretary's mobile phone ban will make pupil behaviour worse. Gillian Keegan announced yesterday that she would ban smartphones from classrooms, both during lessons and in breaks, to ensure pupils could concentrate on their work. But union leaders have attacked the proposal, claiming it could create problems for teachers trying to enforce discipline. Patrick Roach, general secretary of the NASUWT teaching union, said: "If the Government introduces blanket bans that are unenforceable, this will make the behaviour crisis worse, not better. Abusive use of mobile phones is not just confined to the classroom and we need to see better support for schools and families when problems arise." Geoff Barton, of the Association of School and College Leaders, claimed it was "a policy which isn't needed for something that isn't a problem, timed for the Conservative Party conference in a desperate attempt to grab a headline". Slavery-link statues win new protection Contested statues and memorials must be kept in place as a default under new guidance to be issued by the Government, the Culture Secretary announced. New "retain and explain" guidelines will be issued to make clear that controversial assets should be accompanied by an explanation of their history, rather than being removed. The guidance will be designed to support custodians of disputed commemorative items and to "push back" on cancel culture, according to the Department of Culture, Media and Sport. Lucy Frazer, the Culture Secretary, took aim at those who "would apply a two dimensional filter of morality outrage on actions or statements", as she announced the policy during her speech. She further accused some in the Labour Party of being "ashamed of our country's culture, its people or its past." She told the audience in Manchester: "I believe in the British people. What some call culture wars, I say, is standing up for our principles. "Pride, tolerance, understanding, learning, respect, fairness and common sense, for not erasing our history." "And why I will be shortly publishing new guidance on retain and explain for statues, so that rather than tearing down our history we can understand it." EU bendy banana ban is banished Britain will scrap "absurd" EU rules on the sale of bendy bananas almost four years after leaving the bloc, the Environment Secretary has announced. Therese Coffey said the much-ridiculed Brussels regulations, which became totemic in the Brexit debate, will be wiped from the statute book. Rishi Sunak faced criticism when the contentious red tape was not included on a list of European laws destined for the scrapheap earlier this year. Ms Coffey said the move was part of efforts to "help farmers and rural businesses by making the most of our Brexit freedoms". She told delegates: "We've already legislated to allow gene editing so that we can design crops that are fit for the future. My officials are cutting red tape and introducing smarter regulation. Frankly, bent or straight, it's not for Government to decide the shape of bananas you want to eat. "I just need to assure you they are safe to eat. So, we will be dropping absurd regulations including the one on bendy bananas." The rules state that the fruits have to be "free from malformation or abnormal curvature". Crackdown on '15-minute cities' Councils could be blocked from fining drivers under a crackdown on the "sinister" misuse of so-called 15-minute cities, the Transport Secretary has said. Mark Harper said he was looking at ways to cut off access to driver licence databases if councils used them to police traffic restriction measures. The 15-minute city is based on the idea that a person can access amenities within a quarter of an hour by walking or cycling. In some cases, this could result in traffic restrictions being brought in for drivers. The most high-profile example of such a plan is in Oxford, where the council put forward proposals to divide the city into six "15 minute neighbourhoods". Under the proposals, some car drivers would have to apply for a permit to travel through "traffic filters" for a maximum of 100 days a year. Mr Harper said: "There's nothing wrong with making sure people can walk or cycle to the shops or school. That's traditional town planning. "But what is different, what is sinister, and what we shouldn't tolerate, is the idea that local councils can decide how often you go to the shops, and that they can ration who uses the roads and when, and that they police it all with CCTV. "I am announcing that the Government will investigate what options we have in our toolbox to restrict over-zealous use of traffic management measures including cutting off councils from the Driver Vehicle Licensing Agency database if they don't follow the rules." The speech was followed by the publication of the "Plan for Drivers", which also included details of plans to tackle potholes and action against low-traffic neighbourhoods (LTNs). In the document, the Department for Transport said it would look at rolling out "lane rental" schemes for utility firm roadworks across England, which could raise funds to fix the pothole crisis. Ministers would also "consider ... how to address existing LTNs that have not secured local consent". Minimum service plan for universities Striking lecturers could be forced to work as the Government plans minimum service levels for universities. Gillian Keegan launched an attack on militant academics yesterday as she said universities would face a clampdown on strike action. The Government would launch a consultation on minimum service levels at universities to protect students from protests, she said. The move could result in students being guaranteed continued services, such as teaching contact hours and marking, during walkouts. Mrs Keegan announced the policy after a prolonged marking boycott across UK universities in the last academic year that led to thousands of students not receiving their grades on time. She said that students had faced "constant strikes" in recent years. "We've seen students not getting the education they've paid for and some not even having their degrees marked. This is outrageous behaviour."Net zero 'a religion for climate activists' Net zero has "become a religion" for climate change activists, the Energy Secretary said. Claire Coutinho defended her party's decision to water down elements of its net zero strategy, including delaying the ban on the sale of new petrol and diesel cars from 2030 to 2035. She said it would be "immoral" to "impoverish" people in the UK when carbon emissions were rising in other countries. She told Tory activists: "The likes of Just Stop Oil and Extinction Rebellion, funded by the same people who fund Labour, do not get it. For them, net zero has become a religion. For us it is a practical mission to be achieved. They want to force people to behave a certain way or face punitive taxes. And more than that they show sheer condescension about people's normal way of life." Ms Coutinho added: "For too many people, [net zero] has started to feel like an intolerable cost, at a time when they feel that they can least afford it. "Across Europe, we are seeing the consequences when the public feel they are being forced into the wrong decisions for their homes and their families. "If we are to succeed, net zero can't be something that is done to people by a privileged elite. We cannot force people to make the wrong decisions for their families, and it's immoral to put forward policies that will impoverish people here when emissions are rising abroad". She concluded by saying it was eco-zealots who posed a greater risk than climate change deniers, because they were putting people off green measures. "It is these zealots who would see the cause of climate change lost," she said. "They don't seek to persuade, only to disrupt." Labour's 'message of hopelessness' to young black people Kemi Badenoch has accused Labour of peddling a "narrative of hopelessness" to young black Britons that promotes "asking for reparations" instead of being aspirational. The Business Secretary said that Sir Keir Starmer would "bend the knee" to "those who would re-racialise society". In contrast, she said the Conservatives believed Britain "is the best country in the world to be black because it's a country that sees people, not labels". Mrs Badenoch also attacked the Labour leader for not knowing "what a woman is" and suggested that showed his party was not ready for government. She told Tory activists: "Last year I published a report that told the truth about race in the UK. Labour didn't like it. They want young people to believe a narrative of hopelessness. A narrative that says there is no point in trying, because society is against you and you're better off asking for reparations. "That tells children like mine the odds are stacked against them. Conservatives want young people to be proud of their country when others want them to be ashamed." She said it "wasn't a tough decision" for the Conservatives to "reject the divisive agenda of critical race theory". "If that puts us in conflict with those who would re-racialise society, who would put up the divisions that have been torn down well, bring it on," she said. "Let Labour bend the knee before this altar of intolerance. We'll keep building a country that is, in every way, stronger and fairer for all." Mrs Badenoch also attacked Labour on trans rights. She said: "I will not apologise for fighting for a society that knows what a woman is. There is no other party that will defend common sense." Bye-bye Bray Anti-Brexiteer told to leave mAnti-Brexit campaigner Steve Bray was removed from a fringe event at the Conservative Party Conference. Mr Bray was escorted from a meeting of the Bruges Group, a Right-wing think tank that supported leaving the European Union, after interrupting a speaker with shouts of: "Where are our Brexit benefits?" Come dine with me Priti proves popular Lunch with Priti Patel sold for £1,700 at a Tory grassroots dinner as the former home secretary tore into the party leadership for sidelining members. Activists and donors shelled out almost £10,000 for a dozen items at a fundraising auction, with the lots featuring memorabilia donated by Boris Johnson. Any party will do Hall fluffs her lines A senior Tory said she hoped to be the first "female Labour mayor" of London in a slip of the tongue. Susan Hall, the Conservative candidate for the role, made the gaffe after repeating her commitment to scrap the controversial Ulez extension. Just like old times Farage back on deck Nigel Farage made his first visit to a Conservative conference since the time of Margaret Thatcher. The former Ukip and Brexit Party leader, who attended an event with Liz Truss, said he had not been to the Tory conference since the late 1980s. Graphic    Rishi Sunak applauds Jeremy Hunt's speech, in which the Chancellor said he planned to reduce staffing at the Civil Service to pre-pandemic levelsTELEGRAPH THE FOR GROVER PAULLiz Truss takes the stage at a grassroots meeting at the Conservative Partd conference in Manchester. The former prime minister used her address to urge Jeremd Hunt to reduce corporation tax to 19 per cent or belowREUTERS MCKAY HANNAHAttendance was sparse when Lucy Frazer took to the lectern Load-Date: October 3, 2023  End of Document
