   While America's economy roars ahead, Britain is weighed down; WEEKEND ESSAY Energy costs, planning rules and all-round timidity combine to stifle UK growth, while the US is an engine of commerce and innovation. Juliet Samuel asks: how can we catch up? The Times (London) August 26, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 28,29 Length: 2424 words Byline: Juliet Samuel Body   'E verything we've known in the past - nothing seems to apply any more," says Nimisha Raja. To say that the entrepreneur has had a bumpy ride with her food production company, Nim's Fruit Crisps, would be an understatement. The business, which makes air-dried fruit and infusions at its factory in Kent, has survived Brexit (when it stopped exporting), Covid (it pivoted from commuter snacks to supermarkets), supply chain chaos (it had to stockpile), labour shortages and, worst of all, the gas crisis (monthly bills went from £2,500 to £18,000). Now, it is dealing with lacklustre consumer demand thanks to inflation. Raja's workforce, which peaked at 25 people a few years ago, is down to 18. "It is just people tightening their belts," she says. "We're just not growing as fast." "Just not growing as fast": it is a dismal summary for the whole British economy. Recent data showed the UK grew just 0.2 per cent during the second quarter of the year and inflation, while falling, is still persistently above the US, at 6.4 per cent. The slowdown is not a recent phenomenon. For decades, Britain has invested less than both Europe and the US, in both public and private spheres, a trend that worsened after the Brexit vote in 2016. Britain's real GDP per person, at $47,000, has grown just 6 per cent since 2007. Euro area real GDP per head is up a little more, at nearly 9 per cent. But both have been left behind by the US, where real GDP per capita has surged nearly 17 per cent since 2007 to $63,000. Figures suggesting that, before accounting for inflation, Britain now produces less wealth per person than Mississippi, the poorest state in America, recently caused a stir. The Financial Times asked: "Is Britain really as poor as Mississippi?" To which The Atlantic responded: "Is Mississippi really as poor as Britain?" The answer comes down to which data you use but what is clear is that the UK economy is losing ground against the US. The question is why. Rina White grew up in New Orleans, the daughter of Indian immigrants, and as a young adult went from Harvard Law School to a prestigious consulting job at McKinsey. Yet in her thirties she quit, moved with her husband and children to Jackson, Mississippi, and, with her savings, bought a commercial laundry equipment business. The move was a cause of some "head-scratching" for her family, she admits, but is part of what she calls a "movement coming out of a lot of the business schools where mid-career professionals who get tired of climbing the corporate ladder strike out to do something entrepreneurial". It paid off. White was able to grow sales to record levels. Within three years she had generated an attractive offer from a buyer and sold with a healthy return. Like Raja, White had to deal with the impact of Covid, supply chain problems, labour shortages and inflation. She missed out on Brexit, naturally, and the energy crisis, thanks to the US's plentiful domestic production. Energy costs went up a bit, she says, but "it wasn't material". The same cannot be said for Nim's Fruit Crisps. Although Raja was able to find British buyers to replace her European customers, and energy bills have come down from their peak, they have settled at about £7,500 a month, triple what they were before. Because she was not deemed to be in an "energy-intensive" industry, she has received no help at all. Europe's gas supply rollercoaster is just the worst example of its energy disadvantage. In fact, energy costs in Europe have been diverging from North America for about the past 10 to 15 years. After 2008, energy costs fell sharply on both continents. But whereas Europe's went quickly back up, America's fell further. The driver of the fall was the shale gas revolution. From 2008 to 2022, the US more than tripled gas production. Prices fell and a historically unprecedented gulf in costs opened up between North America and Europe. For most of the past decade, Europe has paid double or triple what North America was paying for natural gas. In 2021, gas prices in Europe surged to more than fivefold what they were in the US. Europe's energy mix was also more expensive: while renewables make up a similar proportion of the mix, Europe relied relatively more on oil, a more expensive fuel, and more quickly shut down its coal, a cheaper fuel. Since David Cameron, years of dithering, protests and planning battles over whether to explore UK shale resources (whose potential cannot be confirmed without years of exploratory drilling) have in effect shut down the prospect for the foreseeable future. British energy producers have suffered from high prices, thanks to a policy mix that favours households over industry. Number crunching by Rian Whitton, an analyst at Bismarck Analysis, shows that in 2021-22 Britain had both the highest industrial electricity costs and the worst automation rate in the developed world. Whereas the UK had about 150 robots per 10,000 industrial workers in 2020, the US had 250, according to the International Federation of Robotics. Britain was below the global average of 175, and far behind the world leader South Korea which had 900. Cheap electricity is needed to make automation investments economical, Whitton argues. "Robots improve productivity in the long term, but they are not simple investment decisions. Countries that excel in robot adoption rely on big corporations that have the spending power to invest." This failure forms part of a pattern: while Britain has many of the raw ingredients to promote innovation and investment, it is held back by critical limitations. For example, there are plenty of British scientists with good ideas, funds of foreign capital willing to back our startups and buy mature businesses. But in between there is a gap. This means, according to the venture capitalist Anne Glover, co-founder of Amadeus Capital, that a British entrepreneur may have to spend half her time fundraising, compared with a tenth spent by her American counterpart. There are, she says, "much deeper pools" of capital available in the US and "they accept the failure rates that go with it". In part, this is due to regulations discouraging risk-taking by pension funds, forcing them to invest disproportionately in bonds and large corporations rather than putting more into higherrisk, higher-growth businesses. Another notable difference is that the UK spends far less on research and development (R&D) than the US. The government has increased its science budget in recent years, helping to move British R&D spending from 2.3 to 2.9 per cent of GDP, compared with 3.5 per cent in the US, but private companies have yet to follow suit. T he British planning system doesn't help. The area around Cambridge, one of Britain's most productive areas, has become infamous for strangling growth with a lack of laboratory space for burgeoning companies to expand into. Earlier this year, Savills reported that just 0.6 per cent of lab space in the area was vacant and ready to host growing research teams. This is part of a much wider problem, namely the extraordinary cost of building infrastructure and of building and buying houses in the UK. High Speed Rail 2 is the most expensive high-speed line per mile of track in the world and the average British house costs about nine times the average salary in 2022, compared with five times average wages for the average American house. The knock-on effect on British labour mobility could help to explain why British productivity is so lacklustre. The National Grid plays its part in stifling expansion too. In May, Ofgem warned the grid owner that waiting times of up to a decade for connecting new power generating infrastructure were "unacceptable". Delays for companies trying to consume energy are also weighing on growth: Paragraf, a British semiconductor company in Cambridgeshire, was recently forced to spend months negotiating and eventually pay £1 million to get power into a new warehouse. In Scotland, when the North Sea oil producer Ithaca Energy applied for a grid connection to electrify one of its offshore rigs, it was told the connection would take seven years. Planning constraints are much less of a factor in parts of the US where the economy is booming, such as the Dallas-Fort Worth region. When the television show Dallas aired in the 1980s, its opening credits were a montage of nodding donkeys and brown fields of cattle around a cluster of tall buildings. A version made now might feature the city's huge biotechnology laboratories, sprawling universities, its vast new Goldman Sachs office, seven-runway airport and army of corporate workers staffing the city's growing fleet of company headquarters. "The economy is very, very diverse here," says Mike Rosa, who works at the Dallas Chambers of Commerce. One advantage is that land is cheap considering the population has grown to 8 million, including a pool of 350,000 students, many in sciences. The airport has become a hub and transports 73 million passengers a year to 260 destinations, versus Heathrow's 63 million passengers and 185 destinations. "There's room to grow. We can grow in all directions and we have grown in all directions," says Rosa. Texas also has no income or corporation tax, relying only on property and sales tax, and even local school districts can offer grants to lure corporate headquarters. The likes of McLaren and Caterpillar recently moved to the region. A slew of stimulus programmes from the federal government is also playing its part. The Inflation Reduction Act is handing out $369 billion in grants to green projects, prompting the growth of local solar panel manufacturing, and the $52 billion Chips Act has prompted Texas Instruments to start building a $30 billion new semiconductor fabrication plant nearby. The US government's repeated use of vast spending programmes, quantitative easing and tariffs to stimulate its economy is in stark contrast to the UK and Europe's programmes of austerity since 2010. While Britain has been forced to limit spending and raise taxes to the highest level since the Second World War, the US can cut taxes and spend thanks to global demand for the dollar, which has so far given America an apparently unlimited ability to borrow money without spooking bond markets. After borrowing heavily to fund a post-2008 stimulus, the US only ever brought its deficit down to 4.4 per cent of GDP, whereas the UK consolidated down to 2.3 per cent and the EU almost to 0. Unfortunately, Liz Truss's experiment with unconstrained borrowing showed the stark limits placed on Britain by gilt markets. The US also provides its companies with a vast internal market that is somewhat insulated from trade and competition. The value of all American trade was worth just 25 per cent of its GDP last year, whereas for the UK it was 69 per cent. With global trade growing more slowly relative to GDP since the financial crisis, the UK's dependence on trade may have been a disadvantage for its economy in the past decade. On that score, Brexit has not helped. "It was [always] going to be costly to uproot all the connections that Britain had made with Europe and establish other patterns of trade," says Paul Romer, previously chief economist at the World Bank and now a professor at Boston College. Even worse, UK business investment, which had been growing sluggishly, flatlined for several years after the Brexit vote. The advantages promised from a more nimble regulatory environment, such as a liberalised biosciences sector or less punitive capital rules on insurers, have failed to materialise. S till, the US is certainly not free from stifling bureaucracy and appalling costs. Product regulations in America are some of the most arduous in the world; drug and medical costs are infamously high and infrastructure projects have to navigate a maze of local, state and federal permits. A 2022 Brookings Institution study shows that one offshore wind project near Long Island in New York will have taken over five years from application to operation by the time it starts generating this year. Nor does the UK perform poorly on international measures of business bureaucracy compared with the US. The World Bank's "ease of doing business" ranking for 2020 (the latest available) placed Britain eighth in the world, just two places behind America. In other words, while Britain's regulatory and fiscal problems are undoubtedly holding back growth, the US's advantages are not entirely clear cut. American companies also have to deal with overbearing bureaucrats and enormous legal burdens. The primacy of the dollar, meanwhile, is not something that can be easily replicated - and may be a disadvantage to certain sectors of the US economy because the currency's strength makes imports relatively attractive for American consumers. Other apparent strengths of the American economy also involve trade-offs. The US labour market is more flexible than the British or European markets as Americans can be fired and hired more easily. But overall employment is significantly lower. One reason, according to Romer, may be the opioid epidemic, which is taking many young, otherwise fit workers out of the labour force. "Lots of people are being left behind," he says. One key difference investors and entrepreneurs do highlight is cultural. As one Greek entrepreneur who recently moved from London to New York puts it: "Europeans will tell you 30 reasons why your business will fail. Americans will say, 'Go for it'." Or, as Timothy Draper, the Silicon Valley venture capitalist, says: "Here we believe anything is possible, and we keep being proven right." Still, not all Americans are so optimistic. Romer characterises the US economy as a system that excludes too many and fails on fundamental measures, such as improving life expectancy, while producing multibillion-dollar industries of deeply questionable social and spiritual value, like addictive social media. "If it is the case that Britain is going to make some kind of adjustment in its fundamental assumptions, then I think it's worth asking whether the United States is the right model," he says. "There might be another country, like Sweden." He may be right. Sweden has certainly performed better than Britain. Its GDP per capita, however, is still failing to keep up with the US. For all its flaws, the great American juggernaut remains an unmatched engine of wealth creation. "  While Britain has many of the raw ingredients to promote innovation and investment, it is held back by critical limitations Graphic    Detroit is being revived by electric cars. Left, Nimisha Raja has had slow growth at her UK food businessNIC ANTAYA/AFP/GETTY IMAGES; AMIT LENNON FOR THE Load-Date: August 26, 2023  End of Document
