   Why migrant arrivals to the UK have nearly tripled despite Brexit promises CE Noticias Financieras English June 5, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1644 words Body    Reino Unido  Three successive prime ministers promised it. And they all ended their terms in office without achieving it. Reducing migration to the UK has been a constant commitment of the Conservative Party in the 13 years it has been in power. David Cameron and Theresa May spoke of bringing the figure down to "tens of thousands". Boris Johnson "learned the lesson of an overly specific promise" and simply stated that the numbers would go down after Brexit, notes Chris Mason, BBC political editor. However, Mason adds, the promises of all three politicians "were wiped out by reality." The rhetoric again clashed with the facts in the government of current Prime Minister Rishi Sunak. Net migration . The data are for people who arrived in the UK for at least 12 months. The figure represents an increase of 164,000 over the 2021 total. And it is almost triple the net migration in 2019, which was estimated at226,000. The pro-Brexit campaign promised first and foremost to regain control of the borders or "take back control", as the popular slogan of those who pushed for the exit from the European Union used to say. How then can we explain that almost 7 years after the Brexit vote, net migration is still on the rise?   Mujer con una pancarta a favor de Brexit  Behind the increase there are three main factors, according to data from the ONS and experts consulted by the BBC. 1-Internationalstudents The figure of 606,000 net migrants in 2022 results from subtracting 557,000 . Of these 1.2 million entrants, 925,000 came from outside the European Union. And of these, almost 40% came on student visas. "International students are a very important source of income for British universities," Mariña Fernández Reino, a senior research fellow at Oxford University's Migration Observatory, told BBC Mundo. "Universities were very dependent on students from China, who were the vast majority of international students coming in recent years." "So the government promoted a diversification strategy so that, in case that flow of students dropped, university admissions would not suffer so much."  Estudiantes graduados de Imperial College, una de las universidades más prestigiosas de Londres.  Peter Walsh, an expert at the same center at Oxford University, told the BBC that there have been initiatives by the government and the universities themselves to recruit students, for example, from India and Nigeria. "International students pay higher tuition fees that subsidize the education of local students in the UK," Walsh added. To attract students, the government less than two years ago introduced so-called "post study work" or "work after study." "This means that if you come as an international student you can then stay for two years working in any job, even if it is not linked to what you have studied," explained Fernandez Reino. "That made the option of coming to the UK more attractive than what existed before, when you could come for a year but then you had to leave." Another factor that boosted the numbers is that students from India, Nigeria and other countries often come with their families. Fernandez Reino noted that "a high percentage come with dependents, with partners or with children. So this means that the number of people coming on student visas has increased a lot. Most of the students from China, on the other hand, came alone". Walsh told the BBC that last year international students brought "around 100,000 partners and children".  Control de pasaportes en un aeropuerto británico New restrictions on students The Rishi Sunak government recently announced limitations on the entry of student dependents. Fernandez Reino explained that starting next  year,only those coming to pursue master's degrees or research doctorateswill be able to bring in dependents . "That of course is going to impact two things. One is that fewer will come, because only the student who enrolls will be able to do so. And another is that the change may make it less attractive to study in the UK." "Research master's degrees are normally two years and are the ones that give access to a PhD program here. It's a very small percentage of master's degrees. And they have not been barred from bringing dependents because if you have a family you can't split four years." The Russell Group, which represents most of Britain's top universities, said the new restrictions will impact the ability of study centers to attract "the vital income" that international students bring.  Migración a Reino Unido en 2022. [ 606.000 migración neta (los que llegaron menos los que se fueron) ],[ 1,2 millones llegaron y 557.000 se fueron ],[ 925.000 de esos 1,2 millones vinieron de fuera de la UE ],[ 39% de esos 925.000 fueron estudiantes internacionales ], Source: Fuente: ONS, Image: Persona con pasaportes en la mano  2-Work visas The second largest driver of the increase in net migrants in 2022 was the number of workers from outside the European Union. Their number nearly doubled from 137,000 to 235,000 in the space of a year. In the case of EU citizens, more people left the UK in 2022 , according to the ONS.  Cuidador sosteniendo las manos de una persona mayor  The increase in workers from outside the EU was primarily due to the extension of the visa for "skilled workers" or skilled workers. That route, prior to Brexit, already allowed entry for skilled people sponsored by British companies or institutions, such as doctors or nurses. But in 2022 it included "more occupations that are often not considered fully skilled. The most important one is care workers with a bit of experience, what they call senior care workers, who can now come in and were previously excluded." "We are seeing that visas increased a lot because those workers coming on special visas for the health sector." The top three countries of origin for health care workers are India, Nigeria and Zimbabwe, according to ONS. Vidia Ruhomutally, who emigrated to the UK from Mauritius decades ago, owns a nursing home in Norfolk County, three hours from London. Ruhomutally told the BBC that she hires many of her workers from India. "Without India we wouldn't be here," he noted. "And without us, the local hospital would have busy beds that it couldn't free up for other patients."  Vidia Ruhomutally  3-Ukraineand Hong Kong Resettlement schemes created in the wake of what ONS calls "unprecedented global events" were the third biggest driver of the increase in net migration. The number of non-EU nationals arriving in the UK via humanitarian routes increased from 9% to 19% in 2022. In 2022, 114,000 Ukrainians and 52,000 Hong Kong nationals entered for at least 12 months. The latter were offered a special visa scheme after China imposed a national security law on the former British colony.  Mujeres con pancartas a favor de la ayuda a refugiados ucranianos "The numbers are too high." Prime Minister Rishi Sunak reacted to the figures released in May by insisting that migration is "not out of control." In a television interview on the day the data was released Sunak said, "The numbers are too high, it's as simple as that. And I want to reduce them." The net migration figure could go down in the future, according to Dominic Casciani, the BBC's home affairs and legal correspondent. "Inflows from Ukraine and Hong Kong are expected to cease and labor inflows may stabilize." On the other hand, "the outflow of international students should increase, while many new ones will no longer be able to bring their family members," Casciani added. For Fernández Reino, "it is always difficult to predict, there is uncertainty. But we are seeing from the data that came out for December 2022, compared to September, that migration has not continued to grow." As for the inflows from Ukraine "they were concentrated just in the months after the invasion and then have been progressively decreasing, although it is always difficult to make a forecast because it is true that there may be a very large deterioration of the conditions of the war".  Rishi Sunak  In the expert's opinion, the number of care and health care workers could continue to increase, if there are no changes in the regulations. "We know that there is a very large labor shortage in those two sectors. But even so, I think the overall numbers are going to go down because the number of people leaving is going to increase." On irregular migration, the government announced in 2022 a controversial plan to send asylum seekers to Rwanda. The initiative has not yet been implemented due to appeals to the British courts and an intervention by the European Court of Human Rights. For Dominic Casciani, the numbers entering the UK "could fall by another 70,000 people if the government's controversial plan to divert almost all asylum claims abroad works, but that's a conditional 'if' as big as the height of the cliffs of Dover."  Personas con pancartas en contra del plan del gobierno británico de enviar solicitantes de asilo a Ruans Costs and benefits Chris Mason points out that migration is much more than a question of numbers. It is an issue that is also about "emotion, communities and public services. It's about promise, people and places. For Fernández Reino, it is important to keep in mind that often"politicians overestimate their capacity to be able to regulate migration flows". "Many times the capacity of politicians to be able to reduce these numbers is limited. Now they are going to try with the issue of reducing the number of student dependents." The change may, however, come at great cost to universities. Migration measures often have a "heads and tails", adds Fernandez Reino. Reducing net migration "always benefits or hurts someone." "And even on the issue of irregular migration and asylum seekers, many times tightening measures don't have the intended effect of limiting people arriving."   Gráfico de la migración a Reino Unido por nacionalidad  Load-Date: June 6, 2023  End of Document
