   Wild beauty, historic charm; France property | Brittany and Normandy had a rush of remote-working Parisians but the tide may be turning. By Zoe Dare Hall Financial Times (London, England) June 17, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, European Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: HOUSE AND HOME;NEWS; Pg. 3,4 Length: 1420 words Byline: Zoe Dare Hall Body   I n Cabourg on the Normandy coast, the tree-lined avenues of ornate 1880s villas that fan out from the seafront Grand Hôtel and casino have changed little since Marcel Proust found inspiration here for his most famous novel, In Search of Lost Time, more than a century ago. The filmset-perfect resort, which attracts flocks of Parisians every summer, is like a museum of Belle Époque architecture. For city dwellers, Normandy has long held an allure, says Blandine de Navacelle, a 35-year-old London and Parisbased creative director who is "slowly taking over" a château in Flottemanville, Normandy, which her greatgrandparents bought a century ago and where she spent her childhood. "Driving to Normandy from Paris on a Friday evening is a challenge but with most companies now adopting a softer policy on working from home, a lot of people like me are now able to spend a lot more time in a second home," she says. At the height of post-lockdown 2021, one in 10 Parisians left the capital, at least for a time, for surrounding regions, according to mobile phone data analysed by SFR Geostatistics.  While Paris's apartment prices fell by 1.2 per cent in the third quarter of 2022, compared with the same period the previous year, those in Caen, the capital of Normandy's Calvados department, and Rouen, the capital of Normandy, rose by 7.5 per cent and 8.2 per cent respectively, according to Notaires de France. Although de Navacelle acknowledges the influx of Parisians during lockdown, she insists there has always been an "old money" fashion for owning a second home in Normandy or Brittany. "Normandy is so beautiful with its deep green tones, beautiful stonework and masonry, and stunning beaches," she says. "Culturally, there is a lot to do, too - many artists had houses in the area, so there are a lot of museums." The nostalgic quest for a quieter life here has also, over the past decade or two, driven many British buyers to relocate to the "Grand Ouest", a large slice of northern France that takes in Normandy, Brittany and Pays de la Loire. Its landscapes of fields and woodland, the Cotswold-like charm of villages lined with stone houses and wild beauty of wide, sandy beaches can resemble less populated parts of rural England. Fiona and Alan Elliott - she, 47, earns an income from UK rental properties, while he, 57, works remotely for an English company - have recently made the move across the Channel, swapping life in Buckinghamshire for a £100,000 farmhouse in the Normandy village of Champ-du-Boult. "We live opposite the local bar, so we've met so many people as they are always popping in," says Fiona, who has been able to relocate, post-Brexit, thanks to her Maltese passport. Alan - by virtue of being married to an EU citizen for more than five years - is applying for his. They have also minimised the expense of vets' fees and paperwork when travelling with their dogs by getting them French pet passports. However, some Britons who made the move before Brexit and the pandemic have found the new financial and geopolitical realities have made life in their rural French idyll unsustainable. Vicky Elliott, 61, and her husband David, 71, have returned to Dorset, having sold their complex with four gîtes (holiday rental cottages) in rural Baud, in Brittany, earlier this year. They bought it for £380,000 in 2015 and sold it to a Parisian buyer for £560,000. "We gradually built up the business and did very well for a few years, mainly with guests from the UK, many of whom came with their dogs," says Vicky. "But Brexit hit and people were concerned about travelling with their pets, as it's so expensive and complicated. Then the Covid shutdown left us struggling to cover our £20,000-a-year running costs." Gaynor Hickmore, a retired nurse, has also returned full-time from Brittany to the UK - to Lymm in Cheshire - after her husband Mark died aged 60 from Covid-19. She recalls the joys of the "lovely lifestyle away from the stresses of everyday life" and "stargazing with a glass of wine" from their traditional five-bedroom longÈre (a long, narrow house), set on half an acre in the hamlet of La Villeneuve. The couple bought the house in 2015 for (EURO)110,000 and Hickmore sold last year for (EURO)175,000 (as a non-EU citizen, she had to pay 33 per cent in capital gains and other taxes). "We did the house up lovingly. We thought it would be great to retire here eventually. But I couldn't justify the costs of keeping it any longer," she says. Other British owners are moving back because of age, says Samantha Smith of Sextant Properties in Camors in Brittany. "They're the type that Continued on page 4 Continued from page 3 bought 20 years ago when they were in their fifties or sixties. Brexit and Covid haven't helped, however. They've missed seeing their grandchildren during travel lockdowns." Relocating British sellers "gave us a glut of property to sell after lockdown but many of the vendors struck lucky by selling to French buyers", says Trevor Leggett, founder of estate agency Leggett Immobilier. His Brittany-based colleague Lisa Greene describes a "sense of frenzy in what is usually a gentle and slow market", which she says continued well into 2022. The post-lockdown frenzy has calmed down now as mortgage rates rise - fixed rates start at 2.95 per cent. While 2021 saw an increase in Francilien buyers (from Paris and the surrounding Île-deFrance) in more than 70 per cent of departments, data for 2022 shows a decrease in many areas near the capital, including every department in Normandy, according to Notaires de France. Now, the tide is turning again, says Leggett, who has watched this ebb and flow between French and English buyers for 20 years. "Many of the properties that were snapped up by French buyers in 2020-21 have come back on the market again as their French owners are either moving back to cities such as Paris, Rennes or Nantes because they've realised the rural life isn't for them - or they were able to télétravail [work remotely] during the lockdowns and are needed back in the office again." On recent sales prices, he says, "they're happy just to get their money back". Anecdotally, Leggett and other local agents have noted a new wave of buyers in Normandy and Brittany seeking to escape the extreme heat in the south for the greener and more temperate north. "Many parts of the south have become too hot in August, so many Parisians, myself included, go to Normandy," says Yves Romestan, head of YRSA Progedim estate agency in Paris, who is renovating his recently acquired holiday home in Bernay, Normandy, just over two hours' drive from Paris. For some of today's buyers, the biggest pull is the possibility of absolute isolation, says Samantha Smith. Wealthy Parisian buyers have pushed up prices in coastal towns such as Deauville, where the average house costs (EURO)8,071 per sq m, up 12.6 per cent in the past year. The Grand Ouest's other highest-priced hotspots - away from the main cities - are all coastal, too, including Carnac Plage in south Brittany, with an average house price of (EURO)5,575 per sq m and the ports of St Malo and Dinard. Overall, house prices in Brittany have risen 42 per cent over the five years up to June 2023 and by 26.9 per cent in Normandy in the same period, according to Notaires and Insee data. But, at the lower end of the market, even as low as (EURO)50,000 buyers can find a "nice, habitable house", says Greene, who adds that a renovation project could still cost as little as (EURO)30,000. For the British buyers pursuing this rural dream in northern France, the challenges are very much those of a post-Brexit and post-pandemic world. But, as Proust knew well, once there the landscapes and lifestyle inspire a cathartic sense of stepping back in time. i / AT A GLANCE Buying costs in France are about 13 to 20 per cent of the sales price, including 5.8 per cent stamp duty for properties more than five years old. Vendors pay a social levy charge, which is 7.5 per cent for EU residents and 17.2 per cent for non-EU residents. As non-EU residents, British sellers may face a capital gains tax bill of up to 36 per cent, depending on circumstances. In 2021, 70 per cent of French departments reported an increase in buyers from Paris and Île-de-France (known as Franciliens). In 2022, every department in Normandy saw a decrease in Francilien buyers (Notaires de France). 'Culturally, there is a lot to do, too - many artists had houses in the area, so there are a lot of museums' Graphic    (Above and above right) The beach at Dinard. (Below) Cycling in Cabourg Getty Images/iStockphoto; Hemis/Alamy(Clockwise from above) Conchesen-Ouche in Normandy; Load-Date: June 16, 2023  End of Document
