   'Bad Boys of Brexit' Arron Banks and Andy Wigmore who helped fund Nigel Farage's Leave campaign accuse banks of 'political ethnic cleansing' after their accounts were also cancelled without explanation MailOnline July 30, 2023 Sunday 8:52 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 507 words Byline: Dan Woodland Body   Arron Banks, Andy Wigmore and Richard Rice claim accounts have been closed Claims come after Farage was ditched by UK's most prestigious bank Coutts Three brexiteers have claimed their bank accounts have been cancelled with no explanation as part of a regime of 'political ethnic cleansing'.  Arron Banks, co-founder of the Leave.EU campaign, Andy Wigmore and Richard Rice, leader of the Reform UK party, each claim they have been cut off by their respective banks.  Banks said Barclays had closed his accounts in 2018 because of his support for Brexit, while his right hand man Wigmore and his wife and children had their NatWest accounts frozen while on holiday last year, according to the Times.  Tice, 58, also claimed that Metro Bank had closed Reform's business account in 2021 while digital banking provider Tide closed his consultancy business' account a year later. The claims come after Nigel Farage revealed he had been ditched by Britain's most prestigious bank Coutts, which is owned by NatWest, due to his political views, which was later revealed to be true.  The three men, who formed the so-called 'bad boys of Brexit' along with Farage, have citicised the alleged moves by the UK financial giants.  Wigmore said: 'Howard Davies [NatWest Chairman] and Alison Rose [Former NatWest CEO] seem to have presided over a regime of political ethnic cleansing.  'Had I not had some very good friends to help me, my family would have been absolutely screwed.'  Tice added: 'This is a defining moment - you are now seeing the revenge of the right against the woke.' Banks, who previously donated £8million towards his unofficial Brexit campaign, also claimed his ex-wife and his brother's law firm had been affected.  These new claims are likely to fuel calls for the Government to act to ensure political campaigners are not banned by overly cautious banks.  Former UKIP leader Farage first revealed he had been ditched Coutts, which is owned by parent company NatWest, on June 29 and claimed it was due to his political views.  But on July 4, a BBC story quoted a source at the bank saying his account was closed for failing to meet minimum wealth thresholds. NatWest CEO Alison Rose later revealed she had been the source of the BBC article and admitted the information she provided had been incorrect.  After attempting to cling on to her role she resigned in the early hours of 26 July, while Coutts CEO Peter Flavel stepped down with immediate effect the next day.  NatWest boss Howard Davies has vowed to stay on in his role until April 2024 as planned despite mounting pressure for him to step down as well.  Anti-Brexit campaigner Gina Miller, shot to fame when she launched two legal challenges to the Government's attempts to 'get Brexit done', also had the bank account for her political party shut down without explanation.. She claimed that several weeks ago online bank Monzo suddenly closed her political party's account, saying it could not 'share the specific reason' while referring vaguely to its 'legal and regulatory responsibilities'. Load-Date: July 30, 2023  End of Document
