   'King may need to exert influence on his first visit to Republic'; Monarch will require gracious diplomacy amid Brexit tensions, writes John Downing Belfast Telegraph July 11, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10,11 Length: 758 words Byline: John Downing Body   IT'S a fair bet that King Charles will have a try at speaking Irish when he makes his first official visit to the Republic of Ireland as monarch in the coming weeks. But King Charles's first formal visit to the Republic plays to a very different dynamic in British-Irish relations than when his late mother, Queen Elizabeth II, wowed the country on her groundbreaking visit in May 2011. The late Queen's symbolic efforts to signal real reconciliation, including those welcome words of Irish, warmed hearts across the land. But her son will need all his gracious diplomacy - and some more - to effect a shift in a relationship between London and Dublin which has been around a dangerous corner in recent years. Brexit and all its unpleasant fallout, compounded by the mendacious behaviour of Boris Johnson and other Tories, have taken a large toll. In his long years as Prince Charles, he made remarkable efforts to cope with his justified sense of fury and dark desolation at the IRA murder of "the grandfather I never had", Lord Louis Mountbatten, in Sligo in 1979. These efforts have been widely acknowledged for quite some time. He literally extended the hand of friendship and reconciliation to republican leaders Gerry Adams and the late Martin McGuinness, both of whom were undoubtedly close to key IRA leaders at the time of the appalling slaughter of Lord Mountbatten and those in his company. In the aftermath of the IRA killing of Charles's mentor grand-uncle, who was murdered along with three others in a bomb attack at Mullaghmore in August 1979, Sinn Fein's propaganda sheet An Phoblacht struck a really vicious tone in vaunting the slaughter. "We will tear out their sentimental imperialist heart. The execution was a way of bringing home to the English ruling class, and its working-class slaves, that their government's war on us is going to cost them as well," the Sinn Fein paper thundered in pride at the mass horror. Happily, the work of many people on these islands, in the European Union and in the US helped effect great change for the better. It was notable that last May, Sinn Fein's Michelle O'Neill felt comfortable enough with her own members to attend King Charles's coronation in London. Looking back, Charles worked hard to build on the breakthrough visit by his mother in May 2011. In 2015 he met with Gerry Adams at the university in Galway during what was a symbolically loaded visit to both the northern and southern jurisdictions in Ireland. The next day, Charles and Camilla visited the scene of the IRA murders in Sligo. The emphasis was on reconciliation throughout and he embarked on a vow to visit all 32 Irish counties, something many Irish people will never do. But on this upcoming visit, likely to be in September, the new King has another task which is very challenging in a new and subtle way. The June 2016 Brexit referendum produced a result which the Irish government accepted as the will of the British people. Far less acceptable was the conduct of that referendum campaign, the total absence of any kind of consideration for the fallout for the island of Ireland, and the implications for the hard-won 1998 Good Friday Agreement which had delivered fragile peace. The then Prime Minister Theresa May then made all this worse by opting for the hardest possible manifestation of Brexit in ensuing divorce discussions. All of that was compounded by Mrs May's own party's appalling disloyalty to her. There followed attempts by Ireland to help broker a UK-EU compromise, notably in a meeting in October 2019 between Boris Johnson and Taoiseach Leo Varadkar at the Wirral in England. This led to an EU-UK exit deal which was vaunted by Mr Johnson, while the role of the Taoiseach was saluted by European leaders. Then Boris Johnson went on to repudiate the deal he had negotiated and his negotiators played a very disruptive and negligent part in other detailed, ensuing negotiations. For Dublin and Ireland generally, it has all been very hard to take. But big-country-smallcountry relations carry a need for realism for the smaller party especially. There is no doubt that the Irish side want to improve relations, but trust is in short supply and doubt persists about how genuine the current UK government may be about keeping to the latest Brexit compromises. This is where King Charles III could have a positive role. As monarch, he is precluded from politics as such. But his mother, and he himself, have shown that they can exert a deal of influence and help markedly improve the tone of relations in difficult times. Graphic    (From clockwise) Prime Minister Rishi Sunak greeting US President Joe Biden; King Charles with Mr Biden; Chancellor ofthe University of Dublin Dr Mary Robinson welcoming Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip to Trinity College in 2011 GETTY IMAGES; Load-Date: July 11, 2023  End of Document
