   'Post-Brexit slump' for ferry firm; IN BRIEF The Plymouth Herald June 7, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 3 Length: 370 words Body   CROSS-CHANNEL operator Brittany Ferries is suffering a worrying post-Brexit slump in freight traffic and has yet to see passenger numbers recover to pre-Covid levels. The company, which has its UK headquarters in Plymouth, says the fall in freight volumes that came after Brexit has continued and even worsened this year but ruled out jettisoning staff in favour of "cheap labour". Passenger numbers between the UK and France and Spain are significantly up on 2022, the firm said, but still lag behind 2019 which was the last pre-Covid comparison year. Last year Brittany Ferries reported a crash in the number of tourists coming over from France, partly due to post-Brexit border restrictions. But it is freight traffic which is giving the French-owned company its biggest headache. Brittany Ferries said that since Brexit, it has seen a decline of about a fifth in total freight volumes carried on the Channel. And this year the drop has worsened "worryingly". From the start of April, the company has averaged about 2,000 fewer freight units per month than expected. This equates to a drop of about 8% compared with last year. If this weaker pattern continues, estimates for year-end suggest a 15% worse freight performance than originally projected. "Our freight business has become the collateral damage of over-capacity and a price war taking place on short sea routes like Dover-Calais," said Christophe Mathieu, Brittany Ferries chief executive. "Some operators have chosen a business model where loyal seafarers have been replaced by cheap labour, meaning wage bills of between 30% and 60% less than for reputable ferry operators. "This gives them an unfair competitive advantage. We won't take part in a race to the bottom in the ferry sector, but there's no doubt the situation is damaging our freight business today." Brittany Ferries sails from Plymouth, Portsmouth and Poole to five destinations in France and two in northern Spain. Passenger volumes for 2023 are encouraging, if not spectacular, the company said. So far this year Brittany Ferries has booked 1,504,274 passengers, that's those who have already travelled and those holding a forward reservation. It is a 17.6% increase on the same period in 2022. Load-Date: June 7, 2023  End of Document
