   'Starmer's closer ties would make us a vassal state of EU' Sunday Express September 24, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 336 words Body   LABOUR leader Sir Keir Starmer is failing to convince voters he is sincere about backing Brexit, after admitting he wants closer ties with the European Union. The erstwhile arch-Remainer claims he now accepts the UK cannot rejoin the EU. But a Sunday Express poll by WeThink has found only 24 per cent of voters believe he is committed to Brexit. Meanwhile, 39 per cent agreed with the statement "I do not believe Keir Starmer is committed to Brexit", with the remainder saying they did not know. Sir Keir last week said he hopes to negotiate "a much better deal" with the EU if he enters No10, which would involve unpicking the agreement negotiated by former prime minister Boris Johnson. He also suggested the UK could "share a future" with the EU, if it stopped wanting "to diverge and do different things to the rest of our EU partners". This prompted claims that the Labour leader plans to give up the UK's freedoms. Conservative vice-chairman Saqib Bhatti said last night: "Starmer is showing his true colours and clearly nothing is safe from his flip-flopping. It's clear that if he had the opportunity, he would drag the country into endless negotiations and would make us a vassal state of the EU. "Labour would sell out Brexit and betray millions of people from across the countr y." Former Brexit minister David Jones highlighted proposals, backed by France and Germany, to offer the UK "associate membership" of the EU. He said: "Closer relations with the EU in reality means greater entanglement in the labyrinthine EU bureaucracy, from which it is virtually impossible to escape. But that is precisely what Starmer wants. "It is small wonder that the EU thinks now is the right time to announce what they always had planned: a way to drag the UK back into its suffocating embrace." Conservative MP Michael Fabricant warned: "Starmer has made it very clear that he would align with the EU without our ever having a say in their rules. "This is worse than rejoining the EU. Do we really want to go down this path again?" Graphic    Picture: DAN KITWOOD/GETTY Load-Date: September 24, 2023  End of Document
