   'You sound crackers': Tory peer claims Boris Johnson report is 'revenge for Brexit' The National (Scotland) June 15, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 425 words Byline: Adam Robertson Body   A TORY peer has been labelled -crackers- after a suggestion that the Privileges Committee report which found Boris Johnson misled parliament was -revenge for Brexit-. The long-awaited report said it would have suggested that Johnson be suspended for 90 days were he still an MP. Although the committee can-t impose this sanction due to his resignation, it has recommended denying him a former members- pass - barring him from the Houses of Parliament. Speaking on the BBC-s Politics Live, Tory peer Lord Stewart Jackson described the Privileges Committee as a -sham court-. "I really don't like being rude to fellow guests, but you sound crackers"  Good Law Project's Ellie Mae O-Hagan dismisses Lord Jackson's claim that the Privileges Committee report findings were revenge for Brexit#PoliticsLive https://t.co/BCe7fJ3Dob pic.twitter.com/O89vD0dWJi - BBC Politics (@BBCPolitics) June 15, 2023 -Well I don-t think this report is the truth. I think it-s a sham court. It is a kangaroo court. The people there, they-re politicians, they-re masquerading as a quasi-judicial process-, he said. -There wasn-t due process in my opinion. He has been treated unfairly. This process would not have lasted 10 minutes even in a magistrates court.- He said that there were people -out to get- Johnson and that the report was -revenge for Brexit-. Also appearing on the programme was the Good Law Project-s Ellie Mae O-Hagan. In response to Stewart-s comments, she said: -I mean I-m sorry I really don-t like being rude to fellow guests but you sound crackers. READ MORE: Clip of Douglas Ross calling Boris Johnson a 'truthful man' resurfaces -The things you are saying are just crackers. The idea that this is about Brexit. The idea that Britain is a banana republic.- Stewart then interjected and said that was a -bit rich- coming from the Good Law Project. O-Hagan responded: -Excuse me, let me finish my point. You spoke a lot so I think it-s polite to let me finish. -I think it-s really important, if we-re going to get personal, that viewers know you tried to get into politics for a long time and actually you succeeded because Boris Johnson made you a life peer.- Stewart once again interrupted to explain he was an MP and told O-Hagan to -get your facts right-. He did indeed serve as the MP for Peterborough from 2005 to 2017 but lost his seat to Labour at the 2017 General Election. It was then announced in October 2022 that he would be appointed as a life peer. O-Hagan said it -was true- that he served an MP but the fact remained he was made a life peer by Boris Johnson. Load-Date: June 15, 2023  End of Document
