   1 in 4 see a United Ireland within 10yrs; Poll in Republic raises doubts on partition's end Daily Mirror July 3, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 357 words Byline: Joe O'Shea Body   JUST one in four people in the Republic believes there will be a United Ireland in the European Union within 10 years. Almost half (45%) of respondents in the North also believe so. Confidence in the eventual reunification of our island is slipping in the South, at 24%, down seven points on last year. This comes even as demographic change and the perceived failure of the hardline unionist stance on Brexit in the North has moved the "Border Poll" issue front and centre. Support for Ireland remaining a member of the EU remains stable and overwhelmingly positive at 88% in the Republic and 79% in North of the border, according to a poll released by European Movement Ireland. In the North, 71% of people who say they voted leave in the Brexit referendum support Ireland remaining a member of the EU. the The poll, conducted by Amarach Research, is the first dedicated allisland opinion poll on EU issues. It shows a majority (66%) of people in the North believe it is doing worse since Brexit. Just over half (51%) in the ROI believe so. Some 64% of respondents who say they voted leave in the Brexit referendum believe Northern Ireland is doing worse. Noelle O'Connell, CEO of European Movement Ireland said: "This is our 10th year producing an annual opinion poll on EU issues and the first time we have included Northern Ireland in the findings. "Since Brexit, the relationship between people in Northern Ireland and the EU has been uncertain and we think it's important to measure public sentiment towards the major issues affecting the relationship between Brussels and this island. "What's surprising is the large jump of people in Ireland in one year - up from 43% to 58% - who don't believe there will be a United Ireland in the next 10 years. "This is particularly noteworthy as the responses on this issue remained relatively constant over three years, with about one third of people in Ireland saying they believed there would be a United Ireland in the EU." in the island news@irishmirror.ie 88% " 66 Percentage of people in the North say they are doing worse since Brexit 58 Per cent of people in the South can't see island unity within a decade Load-Date: July 3, 2023  End of Document
