   @i Your View i-news September 25, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 20 Length: 958 words Body   Invest in local transport links Hear, hear to what Paul Waugh has to say on the decline of bus services (iweekend, 23-24 September). We in rural areas know what it is really like when there is a lack of transport. Surely more should be spent on improving roads and bus services and the rail system we already have, rather than the eye-watering cost of HS2 to simply shorten rail journeys? JANET WOODS DODDINGTON, CAMBRIDGESHIRE A year is a long time in politics Many commentators are suggesting that Rishi Sunak still has time to win back support before the general election. In contrast, all I see is the next year being a liability for his governing party. In the past few days we have seen net zero watered down, rumours that HS2 will be curtailed and now I hear Donald Trump has endorsed the former! A death knell if ever there was one. Just imagine if similar vote-losing decisions are repeated, along with run-of-the-mill incompetence and continuing low-level sleaze. Looks like a landslide for Labour is approaching. ROBERT BOSTON KINGSHILL, KENT HS2 a better bet than new subs With regard to the kerfuffle over the HS2 extension possibly being scrapped because we can't afford it, no one has raised a peep over the cost of the Dreadnoughtclass submarines currently being built in Barrow at an estimated £31bn with a contingency of a further £10bn. As a long-term observer of these things, these costs are very likely to be exceeded and frankly, even though I live in Scotland and therefore beyond the reach of HS2, I'd prefer a railway. GRAEME HASTIE EDINBURGH Private schools beat the system Whenever the domination of our top universities by the privately educated is threatened, Tory governments ride to the rescue. In 2010, Michael Gove's reforms changed the assessment methods of A-levels and made these exams more highly regulated, but allowed most private schools to use their own exams, set and marked by teachers, to get their pupils into university. Now something similar is happening, with Rishi Sunak "considering ditching the current education system for 16- to 18-year-olds" (iweekend 23-24 September). What's the betting private schools avoid the "British baccalaureate", and continue to teach specialist subjects to provide what Professor Alan Smithers, director of the Centre for Education, calls the "high jumping-off point" for university study? BERNIE EVANS LIVERPOOL It's time to act on net zero If the Government is serious about this country reaching net zero, the time to act is now. First, all new houses approved should have low or zero-carbon heating - no gas boilers in new properties. Whether it is groundsource heat pumps or air-source heat pumps, they are both cheaper and more efficient if incorporated at the planning stage and even electric heating will be more efficient if planned properly. Solar or wind electricity production should be incorporated at the planning stage too. Plus why go back on dates for getting rid of petrol cars? It has just been revealed that the cost of making batteries for electric cars has reduced to the point where it is possible to make an electric car as cheaply as a petrol one. Rishi Sunak needs to gain a backbone about making this country net zero. JANET BURTON PETERBOROUGH Here comes the bride… maybe Sharon Travers' experience getting to her wedding (Page 3 Profile, 23-24 September) reminded me of when I played the organ at a wedding once. The bride was held up similarly and our vicar was getting worried as he waited outside the church, in fact so worried he kept fiddling with the remote control (to me in the organ loft) in his pocket. This set it off and I switched to "bride entry" music and the congregation stood up. This happened a few times and the churchwarden kept having to rush up the loft stairs to tell me that it was a false alarm. The bride did arrive in the end, to everyone's relief! SARAH GALL STANDISH, WIGAN Why do Brexit fans prefer EU? Regarding the article about expat Brexit hardliners wanting Boris Johnson to return (iweekend 23-24 September) - so, Philip Smalley, a retired pub owner from Preston has lived in Spain for 17 years, voted for Brexit and remains a fervent supporter?! You couldn't write it, could you? He'd prefer to live in Spain (an EU member), not the UK. I can't work that one out… LIZ EBDEN THREE CROSSES, SWANSEA The penny seems to have dropped with a majority of voters: Brexit has failed. There is a growing feeling that we need to return to the EU. As someone who opposed Brexit, this all comes far too late. To give ourselves the best chance of a return, we need to stay close to European standards and rebuild relations with the EU. Reversing Brexit will take years, and a clear change of mindset. Charles de Gaulle justified vetoing Britain's applications to join the European Economic Community in the 1960s saying Britain was "not European enough". Sadly he had a point. DAVID ROLFE DIPTON, CO DURHAM Give Larry the keys to No 10 Larry the cat has outstayed a number of past prime ministers and seen off foxes and dogs. We have had enough daft parties seeking election, maybe Larry could be in charge. SUE NOLAN CHINGFORD, LONDON MORE OPINION on inews.co.uk Our commitment We take very seriously our responsibility to maintain high editorial standards, and are grateful to readers for pointing out any errors. i adheres to the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) code of practice. If you wish to complain about our editorial coverage, especially with relation to inaccuracy or intrusion, please write to The Editor, i, 9 Derry Street, London W8 5HY, or email reader@inews.co.uk You can contact Ipso directly at Gate House, 1 Farringdon Street, London, EC4M 7LG, telephone 0300 123 2220, or by email on inquiries@ipso.co.uk Load-Date: September 25, 2023  End of Document
