   "We are all seducible"; From Brexit to al-Qaeda, people tend to think dogmatically. A researcher measures when the brain responds to ideologies Die Welt am Sonntag (English) September 30, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Axel Springer GmbH All Rights Reserved  Section: SCIENCE; Pg. 64; No. 40 Length: 1425 words Byline: Martin Lindner Body   Polarization in society seems to be steadily increasing. But what factors make certain people more prone to radical attitudes than others? University of Cambridge psychologist Leor Zmigrod is a pioneer in an emerging discipline: political neuroscience. She wants to use interdisciplinary methods to better understand authoritarian ideologies such as nationalism, racism, sexism or fundamentalism.    WELT AM SONNTAG:    You study what goes on in the brains of people with radical views. How did you come to do this?    Leor Zmigrod: I've always been fascinated by how the brain is constructed, how it functions and behaves in different situations. But not just in a general biological sense. I wanted to understand the bigger picture, what happens when we express free will, for example, or when we are obedient. What concerns me is the connection between the cognitive, neurophysiological processes in our heads and political life in society.    You are primarily concerned with ideological thinking. We obviously live in a very polarized world, with very different ideologies. These can be racist and sexist or xenophobic attitudes, religious fanaticism as well as nationalism, extreme right-wing and extreme left-wing thinking, or even violent forms of climate activism.    And neuroscience can help to understand these better? The question is, after all, why is our brain so easily captivated by dogma and ideology? There is a wealth of social psychological research that sees the roots of radical attitudes - and actions - in social, historical or economic circumstances. These explanatory approaches have enormous value. But they often fall short. They are also usually based on interviewing people and getting their opinions. Neuroscience, on the other hand, can objectively measure the neurobiological preconditions and consequences of ideological thinking. Apparently, there are certain processes in the human brain that are typically at play in ideologies, regardless of what specific worldview is involved.    So the tendency to think dogmatically is a human trait. Is everyone susceptible to ideologies? In certain social situations, we are all seducible - but not everyone to the same extent. The famous German-Jewish philosopher and political theorist Hannah Arendt argued that all people can succumb equally to ideology. I think from the perspective of today's science, there tends to be a continuum in which one person is more and another less prone to radical attitudes. What this has to do with our brains is precisely the question of political neuroscience.    You have done specific research on nationalist attitudes in the Brexit debate in the UK. After the Brexit referendum, there was an extremely polarized climate in the UK: Who belongs to the nation and who doesn't? Do we need to close borders, keep people out? Here, a trait of ideologies became apparent. They go hand in hand not only with the dogmatic belief that one is in possession of an unshakable truth, but also with the strict identification of a particular social group - the people who share this truth. All others are rejected and discriminated against; they must - to remain in the image of nationalist thought - stay outside. The fascinating thing is that such rigid nationalist positions are also generally associated with rigid cognitive processes.    How can such things be demonstrated? We elicited the respective attitudes in the Brexit debate from our nearly 400 study participants and then presented them with neurocognitive tests that have nothing whatsoever to do with politics, emotions or society. One of the tests involves matching four cards from a deck with a matching fifth, with the rules of matching, such as by color or geometric figures, suddenly changing during the test. Individuals who were able to switch flexibly here also tended significantly less toward nationalistic and authoritarian views.    Now, the hypothesis that authoritarian positions are related to cognitive inflexibility is not entirely new. That's true, but it also just depends on actually measuring the connection with standardized neuropsychological instruments. This allows us to learn about information processing in the brain and how it interacts with different ideologies. Meanwhile, there are many other examples of this. For example, test subjects can be asked to look at moving dots on a screen and decide as quickly as possible whether they move to the right or left. Such perceptual judgments are made by the brain in milliseconds and are not subject to conscious control. The amazing thing: Depending on exactly how quickly or slowly the brain carries out its unconscious perceptual analysis, a person tends to think more liberally or more conservatively and nationalistically. By the way, this has nothing to do with intelligence. There are very intelligent people in a wide variety of ideological camps, but they seem to differ in basic mechanisms such as processing sensory information.    The front part of the cerebrum, the prefrontal cortex, is considered a kind of command bridge for higher cognitive tasks: strategic planning, control of emotions, moral evaluations. What role does it play in ideological thinking? In a sense, the prefrontal cortex binds our ideas together and is the basis of our rationality. How this brain area influences ideological attitudes in detail remains a much-debated question, but there is no doubt that it plays a crucial role. For example, a remarkable brain scan study among Muslim migrants in Barcelona examined radicalized followers of the al-Qaeda network who not only advocated violence against civilians, but were themselves willing to fight and die for their goals and higher values. This indeed found altered neural activity in the prefrontal cortex when they thought of their sacred beliefs.    What do you conclude from the findings? One interpretation is that the usual cost-benefit evaluation is suppressed in this area of the brain, and people therefore accept a disproportionately high price for sacred causes - up to and including their own lives. At the same time, the study also provided evidence that such neural signatures of willingness to sacrifice can be partially altered and weakened by social influence from within one's own community.    Can extremist attitudes be detected in the brain scanner? That would be too simplistic. It's a chicken-and-egg question: we can't tell whether people think and act a certain way because their brains work this way or that way - or whether their brains work that way because they live in specific social contexts. We have to think both ways: on the one hand, the brain provides the neural framework in which cognitive processes take place. On the other hand, it is also influenced in this by the social environment. An experimentally tested example of this interplay is that individuals who perceive the capitalist system as particularly fair and just also experience less negative emotion and less physical arousal when they watch videos of homeless people.    Some of your colleagues compare ideological thinking to addiction: it crowds out all other goals. If you wanted to dissuade these people from their obsession, they would become even more radical - for fear of losing everything. This connection between obsessive ideological thinking and addiction is so far more speculative than some other approaches in political neuropsychology. But of course it is an attractive model. We know a lot about addiction mechanisms in the brain and how learning processes and neural reward systems are involved. It will be exciting to study this in more detail in the future.    What does all this imply for the prevention of extreme ideologies? This is, of course, a loaded question. Our discipline is still nascent, and we should probably be cautious about giving overly full-bodied advice. But: understanding that ideological thinking has a neurobiological side opens up a different view. It is possible to understand ideologies beyond the usual political divisions such as left or right and beyond social and cultural attributions. Neuroscience also shows that the brain is very adaptable and that we are flexible in principle in our thinking. If we can encourage people to realize this, much would be gained. Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word.  Document original Graphic    Glowing ideology: Brexit supporters burn a European Union flag in central London in 2019 Load-Date: November 7, 2023  End of Document
