   A psychological crisis looms for Remainers as Europe lurches Right; Most of the British Left has been reflexively pro-Brussels since Brexit. They are in for a nasty shock The Daily Telegraph (London) June 30, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 1157 words Byline: AMBROSE EVANS-PRITCHARD Body   Europe is moving by leaps and bounds to the political Right, and beyond that to reactionary iron-fist parties mobilised by the culture wars. The Left has not suffered such sweeping rejection since the 1930s. Britain is moving to a different rhythm and mostly in the opposite direction. Rishi Sunak's methodical attempt to restore the governing credibility of the Conservative Party is being overwhelmed by the enormity of the task. Labour is riding an almost irresistible national urge for a new start. It is likely that Britain will soon be one of the few large countries in Europe with a centre-Left government, and perhaps the only one as Germany's fractious coalition tears itself apart. This transforms the ideological contours of Brexit. How will the British Left respond when their own sort is in power and is having to negotiate with an implacable Right-wing Europe? The mystery of British politics is why progressives have been such fervent defenders of what the old Left under Tony Benn used to call a "bankers' ramp", a corporatist project that serves the owners of capital marvellously. It is a regime that enables companies to hold down wages through cross-border labour arbitrage, and as we saw in the EMU debt crisis, it acts as an enforcer of creditor interests. "The British Left have been off with the fairies when it comes to the EU," said Prof Costas Lapavitsas, an economist at London University SOAS and a radical Greek MP during the Athens Spring of 2015. "They have been deluding themselves for a long time and they are in for a big surprise when they realise that the EU is not the cuddly project they think it is," he said. Italy already has a hard-Right coalition led by a post-Fascist party. Giorgia Meloni has not yet rocked the boat in the EU - though she might do once the European Central Bank stops mopping up Italian debt - but that begs the question why a party bent on rolling back the entire social and gender platform of the modern Left now finds Brussels more or less congenial. Spain is almost certain to swing to the conservative Partido Popular in July, either in alliance with the neo- Franquista Vox movement or at least relying on their votes. The two parties are already co-operating in five regional administrations. Vox makes Nigel Farage look like a pussy cat. It is at war with gender ideology and "climate religion". It wants to crush the Catalans and Basques, and dynamite the state spending machinery created over the last 40 years. France already has a Right-leaning Gaulliste leader under Emmanuel Macron, though his British fans seem to think him a liberal. That is still not tough enough for French voters. Marine Le Pen is now the country's most popular politician. Recent polls suggest that she would win up to 55pc of the vote in a hypothetical run-off against Macron. Having interviewed her twice over the years, I do not think she is a monster but Britain's pro-EU Left most certainly does, so how would they cope psychologically with a president Le Pen in charge of France, and in charge of the beating heart of Europe? Don't expect Germany to buck the trend. There is simmering fury with the ECB for stoking an inflationary fire by holding interest rates at minus 0.5pc and continuing QE long after the money supply had exploded. Former finance minister Wolfgang Schauble warned that loose money would fuel the rise of the nationalist AfD, and that is exactly what has happened. The latest polls put the party at 20pc, ahead of the ruling Social Democrats. The conservative Christian Democrats are swinging hard Right to cover their flank. They have just pulled a coup in the European Parliament by turning against the EU's Nature Restoration Law. Three environmental Bills have run into trouble over the last month in Strasbourg. Europe's mood of pervasive disenchantment is unlikely to dissipate as governments start to retrench and the EU apparatus gears up for another gruelling episode of fiscal austerity. The ECB, now seriously afraid of "losing Germany", has swung to the other extreme of tight money and is raising interest rates fast and furiously. It is doing so even though the eurozone producer prices index has been falling at a double-digit rate over the past seven months and the money supply is collapsing. The ECB itself says that loan demand has dropped to levels last seen during the Lehman crisis. My working assumption is that Europe will persist long enough with contractionary policies to tip the economy into a debt-deflation trap, leading to a second "lost decade", with all that implies for the stability of European democracies. Most of the British Left have been reflexively pro-Brussels since Brexit chiefly because they detest the Tories, not because they have ever thought much about the workings of the EU. Their Europeanism has taken on the character of a liturgical chant. Prof Lapavitsas argues in his book - The Left Case Against The EU- that "institutionalised austerity" is hardwired into the legal corpus of the 170,000-page acquis, which is all but irreversible. Measures to hold the euro together without fiscal union over the last decade have further empowered the EU budget gendarmes, while the European Court has become a "veritable machine for the relentless application of neoliberal ideology across Europe". His conclusion after living through the Greek ordeal is that it is impossible for a Left-wing government to pursue change within the EU. The Left must therefore "be prepared for a rupture". There is much talk in Labour and Westminster circles of renegotiating the Brexit deal and securing associate membership of the single market. I fail to see how that can be done without running into the Norwegian trap of de facto EU membership without voting rights. Brussels might be gentler with a Starmer government, but I doubt that it would last long. The Commission says the EU is sick of Brexit and that better terms will not be on offer in 2025. "It's a review, not a revision, not a renewal or even amendment of any sort," said Stefan Fuehring, head of the TCA unit. "The British Left will be confronted by a very hard reality," said Prof Lapavitsas. If so, this will test the loyalties of large numbers of activists who have got into the habit of applauding the EU almost gleefully every time it cuts rough with Britain. How long will they feel this way if it is their own Labour government on the receiving end, and if the EU Council dishing it out has become a menagerie of far-Right nationalists? I have long thought that the UK's profound split over Brexit will not heal until the Left is in power and has political skin in the game. Only then will it stop rooting for the other side. And only once national unity is re-established in foreign policy will Britain refind itself. A fundamental realignment is drawing closer. 'The UK's profound split over Brexit will not heal until the Left is in power and has political skin in the game' Load-Date: June 30, 2023  End of Document
