   A working class Tory is something to be; Sunak's government fails to understand that red wall voters are motivated by aspiration and not hostility to migrants The Times (London) September 18, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 27 Length: 1103 words Byline: Philip Collins Body   Politics in Britain was once class in action. In 1951 if you disclosed your income and occupation an analyst could predict, with almost perfect confidence, your party of choice. That bond, between class and political affiliation, frayed slowly from then and, by 2019, it had been severed. The general election that year was the first in which class status was of no value at all in predicting the result. Yet understanding the working class still matters and the Conservative Party really doesn't. In a reversal of a truth of postwar politics the workingclass is now more likely to vote Conservative than Labour. In 2019 the Tories took a 13- point lead among unskilled workers. Among voters in households with an annual income of less than £20,000, 45 per cent voted Conservative, with Labour on 34 per cent. To many on the political left, working-class conservatism feels like a betrayal. How can the workingclass vote against its own economic interest? Is it not a species of self-harm? As the son and the grandson of emphatic working-class conservatives, I am under no such patronising illusion. But it does make me think that the Conservative Party, in a desperate attempt to hold its coalition together, is getting working-class conservatives wrong. Their red wall rhetoric is all stop the boats, send them to Rwanda, cancel the cancel culture, woke is broke. The working-class conservatives of my own history were not turned on by all that. The sense of gloom and hostility that spins off Suella Braverman and Kemi Badenoch just doesn't capture their motivation. Working-class conservatism was not rooted in a world gone wrong; it was rooted in the aspiration for a better life. The working-class conservatives who constructed the platform on which I stand wanted their children and grandchildren to become middle-class. They were unsentimental about the price of this aspiration. It meant a better job, a higher income, a nicer house in a more salubrious part of town or perhaps even a different and larger metropolis. If there was any prospect at all for their offspring to join the metropolitan elite, nobody would have been more delighted than those working-class conservatives. There have always been lots of people of this disposition, and large cohorts in the north of England and in London. There still are, even though the working class today has www.changed.No longer to be found in the mine and the factory, the modern working class is in the health service and hospitality. But it is still made up of people who believe in what Mrs Thatcher thought of as the "vigorous virtues" of thrift, discipline, work and order. And they believe in getting on. There are two strands of opinion in the current Conservative Party making an appeal to working-class voters and neither of them sounds at all like this. The first is the Braverman bullies. It is obvious that the Tory party has seized on immigration and asylum as the only subject on which it might conceivably unite its working-class and middle-class vote. In 2019 Brexit glued the campaign together but getting Brexit done has proved to be a serious problem in that the Tory party no longer has a cause to make. But the Conservative fans of Brexit rarely describe the working-class appeal of Brexit correctly. Brexit had very little to do with the European Union and it was not principally a howl of outrage about immigration either. It is true that immigration featured high in the list of concerns at that time but anxiety about immigration is more complex than it seems. There are some people with egregious opinions, of course, but the greater part of the working-class Leave vote was not made up of racist folk who dislike immigrants. It was made up of people whose hopes were not being realised, who didn't like the change they saw around them, for whom the decline of manufacturing had depressed their hopes. These people latched on to "immigration" as a false proxy for lives not going right. That is conservatism of a kind, to be sure, but its source is not genuine hostility. To respond with a Rwanda policy that sounds nasty and cannot work, and empty promises on asylum that show neither sympathy nor policy imagination, is really to miss the point. The Conservative Party will do no better if it listens to its communitarian wing instead. There is a band of conservatives, strong in the national conservatism movement and whose case is articulated in parliament by Danny Kruger MP, who want people to know their place. They want to shift resources towns and villages outside the southeast, and there is a lot to be said for that. But everything these conservatives say suggests that people should stay put. They always sound as if the socially and geographically mobile person is letting their home town down. Most of them, of course, come from within travelling distance of London. Their brand of stay-at-home conservatism would have been given short shrift by the working-class conservatives I have in mind. Late last week the detailed papers dropped from the Labour National Policy Forum. On the assumption that you have not quite got round to finishing them all, I have scoured them for you. Running through Labour's communication is rhetoric about shattering the class ceiling. Its tired pun sounds out like an echo from a bygone era but Labour does have the sentiment right: "The promise we tell our children and grandchildren is that if you work hard, you'll be able to get on, no matter what your background." My grandfather loathed Labour with a visceral passion precisely because he felt the Labour Party existed to ensure that working-class people remained working-class. He would recognise this sentiment of aspiration even as he would have disdained its source. The one Conservative politician who glimpsed this attitude was Boris Johnson. Giving thanks to his voters after the triumph in 2019, Johnson said: "All those whose pencils may have wavered over the ballot, and who heard the voices of their parents and their grandparents whispering anxiously in their ears, I say thank you for the trust you have placed in us and in me". The levelling-up department was formed but, despite the best efforts of Michael Gove in recent times, it hasn't done enough. With no case to make to workingclass Tories, the Sunak government dials up the hostility. But workingclass conservatism is rooted in hope more than fear. It wasn't about anger and it wasn't about staying put. It was always about getting on. It isn't about anger or staying put it is about getting on in your life People still believe in what Mrs Thatcher called 'vigorous virtues' Graphic    Suella Braverman emanates hostility rather than aspiration for a better life Load-Date: September 18, 2023  End of Document
