   An exercise that should be impartial begins by holding Brexit responsible for Covid's impact The Daily Telegraph (London) June 14, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 1025 words Byline: Gordon Rayner Body   If Baroness Hallett is to stand any chance of a future government accepting the recommendations she will make several years hence, it is imperative that all sides regard her Covid Inquiry as an unquestionably impartial exercise. Within hours of the inquiry starting in earnest, however, those hopes had already been dented by allegations of bias. The inquiry's counsel, Hugo Keith KC, claimed that the effect of the pandemic had been worsened by Brexit. For two years, Mr Keith said, work to address "what were likely to be the severe consequences" of a no-deal Brexit got in the way of the work that was needed to prepare for a possible pandemic. He said: "It is clear that such planning, from 2018 onwards, crowded out and prevented some or perhaps a majority of the improvements that central government itself understood were required to be made to resilience planning and preparedness." Mr Keith justified his stance by saying it was borne out by "the evidence so far". It was a curious statement to make at the start of an inquiry that has not yet heard any evidence at all from live witnesses. That is what the next three years are for, but witnesses might be asking themselves how much of a fair hearing they will get if the supposedly independent inquiry has already made up its mind on a key element of its remit. Were Italy or the US, both of which had similar death rates to the UK, also distracted by no-deal preparations? What about Greece, Croatia and Hungary, which had worse death rates? Mr Keith did not explore that question. Mr Keith is not a prosecutor. His job is to get to the truth by asking difficult questions of those who made the decisions during the pandemic, but instead his opening gambit suggested he has already decided what the truth is, and will attempt to prove himself right, on this point at least. Lockdown sceptics had already cried foul over the inquiry's apparent determination to accept that lockdowns were the right thing to do, rather than questioning whether we would have been better off without them. Those suspicions were only heightened when it emerged that all staff and visitors attending the hearing in Paddington are expected to take Covid tests, more than a year after free tests were scrapped by the Government, meaning the inquiry's Covid policy is far stricter than elsewhere. History has shown us what happens when public inquiries fail to convince governments that they have acted free from bias. Accusations of cover-ups, whitewashes or politicking follow, weighty reports are left to gather dust, and the world moves on. Baroness Hallett already has on her hands a monumental task: she must complete the inquiry and report her findings before either the next pandemic strikes or Covid seems so far in the past that politicians have given up caring. That is enough of a challenge without allowing the whole inquiry to be handicapped by accusations of bias before it has even got through its first week. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the former Brexit opportunities minister, said: "The die-hard Remainers think everything is caused by Brexit, which is delusional. Unfortunately, this foolish comment starts the inquiry off on the wrong foot. It ought to stick to relevant facts, not self-indulgent speculations." Gareth Johnson, the MP for Dartford, added: "To blame Brexit for any failings in preparing for the Covid outbreak is at best premature at this stage of the inquiry. Brexit actually helped us tackle Covid, especially in relation to the vaccine rollout." Monumental task Baroness Hallett leads Covid Inquiry When Baroness Hallett presided over the inquest into the 7/7 suicide bombings, she may have thought her 2011 report into the terrorist attacks would be the biggest task of her storied career. But the retired Court of Appeal judge, 73, will embark on an even more monumental task when she presides over three years of hearings into the Government's handling of the Covid pandemic. She was made a High Court judge in 1999 and in 2005 became only the fifth female judge to sit in the Court of Appeal. The following year she was appointed a member of the Judicial Appointments Commission, which selects candidates to become judges. Her career was marred by "horrific" sexism, she has said. As a young barrister she was thrilled to receive a promotion on one occasion, only to be propositioned by the senior male judge who had got her the job. She also said that after being made a QC, at the age of 39, she was told by one of the judges involved in the process: "We were told we had to have a woman - you were the least worst option." Given the customary damehood when she became a High Court judge in 1999, she was elevated to the House of Lords by Theresa May in her resignation honours in 2019 and sits as a crossbench peer. Gordon Rayner 'Formidable opponent' Hugo Keith KC is inquiry's counsel When Boris Johnson, Matt Hancock and others step into the witness box at the Covid inquiry, they will find themselves subjected to public dissection by "superstar" lawyer Hugo Keith KC. As counsel to the inquiry, Mr Keith is tasked with getting to the truth of what happened during the pandemic by submitting witnesses to hours of forensic questioning. The Government, Queen Elizabeth II, the Princess Royal and Chelsea Football Club are just a few of the names who have turned to Mr Keith to represent them, taking in some of the most memorable courtroom dramas of recent decades. The legal directory Chambers has described him as "a formidable opponent" and "a superstar with fantastic legal knowledge". His calm, methodical and meticulous style will make for a likely contrast with Mr Johnson's broad brush approach. Mr Keith is well known to the inquiry chairman, Baroness Hallett, having been counsel to the inquests into the 7/7 suicide bombings, which began in 2010, and was a fixture at the Leveson Inquiry into media standards as the barrister representing News UK chief executive Rebekah Brooks. Mr Keith represented the late Queen at the inquest into the death of Diana, Princess of Wales. Gordon Rayner 'To blame Brexit for any failings in preparing for the Covid outbreak is at best premature at this stage' Graphic    People hold pictures of loved ones lost during the pandemic outside the Covid Inquiry in London Load-Date: June 14, 2023  End of Document
