   Attacks on devolution following Brexit should come as no surprise The National (Scotland) June 12, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 671 words Byline: Readers of The National Body   I MUST say Lesley Riddoch-s article in Thursday-s National (The Greens are not the enemy here - the crippling limits of Unionism are) really hits the nail on the head regarding Scotland effectively being crippled by Unionism. The politically contrived blocking of the Deposit Return Scheme by this horrible Tory-Brexit-Britnat government is just one of a number of deliberate, crass attempts to undermine our democratically elected Scottish Government and devolution itself. I recall the warnings previously issued by the likes of Nicola Sturgeon and many other leading lights of the independence movement that major political attacks would be initiated by these Tory charlatans following the Brexit betrayal/con in 2016 and its implementation in 2019 by a chancing Tory PM named Johnson. READ MORE: Donald Trump and Boris Johnson believe the rules do not apply to them The fickleness of many Scottish critics is breathtaking to be frank! Do remember the touting of the Union Jack and the push towards selling the GB logo amongst all these Brexit chancers including that political nobody Viceroy Jack, who -crawled out the cupboard- to terrorise Scotland from his lofty Brexit-supporting position as the bogus Secretary of State for Scotland! I believe much of the perceived infighting that Lesley refers to within the SNP and indy movement is tinged with a feeling of frustration and being powerless to take any significant counter-action to challenge a lot of the Britnat government incursions against our SNP/Scottish Government. Our political representatives are regularly being observed -playing the game of politics- full of the usual talk, criticism, defending our right to conduct devolved governance effectively etc! And the frustration within the independence movement is a natural reaction when realising that -all talk and no action- against a political opponent who brazenly practises with impunity, in such an orchestrated and extreme fashion, is getting nowhere in a political sense. READ MORE: Ian Blackford asks for 'action not words' in 'message' to Humza Yousaf Many (not all!) within the indy movement are realising that some form of significant recourse needs to be taken to focus minds on the consequences of said political attacks against our democratically elected government and the relative political ideology that our political enemies/Unionists can-t come to terms with after decades of devolved government in which the quest for independence has come to the fore for good reason. I-m sure many pro-indy backers are beginning to wonder why the SNP/Scottish Government seem to be quite happy to be a regular political punchbag. Why continue with a policy of intransigence? Is it not time to up the game plan in the way that Keith Brown recently hit back at the whole toxic culture of Scottish Tories in the Holyrood parliament? Indeed, has the Scottish Parliament already been abolished without anybody realising it? And as for Scottish laws and formal challenges made by a highly aggressive British government, sadly going the same way? This is a Tory-Brexit government fittingly described by Lesley as now following a -scorched earth- policy of diktat because they are politically destitute - nowhere else to go, and that charlatan Alister Jack is on his way out to pick up his totally undeserved ermine robe!! Good riddance by the way!! IT IS TIME TO FIGHT BACK ASAP! Bernie Japs Edinburgh READ MORE: SNP announce Katy Loudon as candidate for Rutherglen by-election I NOTE the SNP have now managed to find a candidate for the potential by-election in Rutherglen and Hamilton West. The 10% of the electorate now needed to force the by-election amounts to more than 8000 voters. Even with the encouragement and endeavours of an SNP and Unionist alliance, perhaps fewer than that number will see the attraction of a by-election when the UK General Election is possibly a year away. I cannot help but think that if MP Margaret Ferrier was a Tory she would be on her way to the House of Lords by now. John Baird Largs Load-Date: June 12, 2023  End of Document
