   Beat the travel blues this summer, from airport chaos to Brexit red tape; Consumer expert Nick Trend gives tips and insights on how to make the most of your peak season holiday with minimum stress The Daily Telegraph (London) July 15, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: TRAVEL;FEATURES; Pg. 7 Length: 752 words Body   The holidays are looming, excitement is building. Most of us are looking forward to a summer break. But how do you make sure it all goes as smoothly as possible? That you have all the practicalities covered? There are so many things to consider: insurance, money, car hire. Have you had a chance to check your mobile roaming charges? To think about how much foreign currency you might need? What about your rights if your ight gets delayed or if there is a problem with your villa when you arrive? Don't worry, Telegraph Travel has all the answers. Ready for the start of the peak holiday season, we have curated a whole series of advice designed to answer all your practical questions, to ensure you've considered all eventualities, to troubleshoot when things go wrong and, most importantly of all in these straitened times, to make sure you avoid the ripos and get the best value. Below we address some of your most pressing questions and concerns. Flight cancellations and travel chaos Last summer was a nightmare of delays and disruption as airports found themselves understaffed and airlines were forced to cancel thousands of flights. This year has also already seen a succession of setbacks and meltdowns - from strikes by air traffic control, security and passport control stato tech failures at British Airways and on airport e-gates. Adding to the chaos, easyJet has cancelled 1,700 flights between now and September. Few would bet on nothing else going wrong over the busiest time of year: the summer. Luckily, we can tell you how to avoid the worst. If your flight is delayed or cancelled, it is important to know your rights and how to get compensation - in brief, the hold-up must have been the airline's fault and caused a delay of three hours or more. It also pays to know what to do if strikes disrupt your holiday plans this summer, which we also address.?Flight cancelled or delayed? Here's how to claim compensation www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-ight-cancelled?View our stike calendar www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-strikes-dates Car hire Picking up a car should be a straightforward transaction, yet it has become one of the most stressful parts of a holiday. First, there are the risks around insurance - how do you make sure you are properly covered without it costing the earth? Then there are high-pressure selling techniques and endless charges for extras. There are simple steps that will help you de-stress the whole experience, including booking early, paying a deposit and checking your credit card limit to cover any excess. Avoid rip-os at the counter by informing the rental company if you are going to be delayed and checking for damage.?Everything you need to know about booking a hire car this summer www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-hire-car Money There are so many ways that you can pay too much for your holiday money. You might take the wrong credit or debit card with you - look for those that oer good exchange rates and don't add transaction charges. You might buy your foreign currency from the wrong bureau de change - avoiding exchanging in the airport is sound advice. Get it right, however, and you not only save money but gain added protections.?The 10 biggest mistakes to avoid with your holiday money www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-money-mistakes Insurance It is probably the most boring holiday purchase you make each year, but your travel insurance could prove the most vital. When choosing your cover, it pays to consider a multi-trip policy and to read the small print. Even healthy over-60s face far higher prices, while medical conditions make it costlier still - it is possible to find bespoke cover and reduce premiums.?Everything you need to know before buying travel insurance www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-insurance Brexit and Covid There are still lots of issues connected with Brexit and going on holiday. It is vital to know how to navigate the red tape - such as passport validity, taking your pet on holiday and healthcare. Many people are also confused about data roaming. Hopefully Covid is no longer an issue for most people when they travel. But a few rules still linger in certain parts of the world - including around testing, so be aware of these.?How Brexit has changed the rules of travel www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-brexit ?The ultimate (post-Brexit) guide to travelling with your dog www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-travelling-dog ?The countries still with Covid restrictions www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-covid To consult our one-stop shop for holiday know-how this summer, visit www.telegraph.co.uk/tt-advice Graphic    ?Strikes and tech problems at airports are likely to cause queues this summerIf you want the best rates, avoid exchanging money at the airportThe rules on taking pets abroad have changed since Brexit, so brush up on the red tapeTHOMAS LEE IMAGES; GETTY Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
