   Boris and I want to defend Brexit legacy ...could there be a coming together?; NIGEL FARAGE SEES 'BIGGER GAP FOR INSURGENCY' The Express June 12, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 718 words Byline: Michael Knowles Body   NIGEL Farage yesterday hinted he and former prime minister Boris Johnson could join forces to defend their "Brexit legacy". The leading Brexiteer said up to 10 Conservative MPs could be willing to defect to a new party. Mr Farage said: "I see a bigger gap for insurgency today than I did before". He claimed to have spoken to Mr Johnson's team. The Tories' former leader has got no future in the party "whatsoever", Mr Farage insisted. Tory MP Tobias Ellwood described Mr Johnson's resignation as "akin to mutiny". His colleague Tim Loughton wanted Boris to "shut up and go away". Both Mr Johnson and Mr Farage have warned of a plot to overturn the 2016 Brexit referendum. The former Ukip leader said yesterday: "If he [Johnson] wants to defend his Brexit legacy, I want to defend my Brexit legacy too. "Would there be a possibility of a new coming together on the centre-Right? "It would be Boris Johnson, there would be other MPs that would join in with this as well." He added: "I have discussed it with people very close to him and around him. "I don't think he has got any future in the Conservative Party whatsoever. "This idea that he would be allowed to fight a safer seat than Uxbridge...well hang on. "He has effectively gifted Uxbridge to the Labour Party and who knows, the other seats could go to the Lib Dems. "He will be seen to be doing damage to the party. His allies are calling for a civil war. "Boris Johnson's road with the Conservative Party is coming to an end." The former Ukip and Brexit Party leader said he and Mr Johnson were on the "same side" of the "biggest constitutional question we were facing in our lifetimes". Comparing the surge in Ukip support between 2012 and 2015 and potential pacts withTory MPs, Mr Farage said: "Is Johnson somebody who would want to be part of a new attempt to break the mould of British politics, or would he rather be on the after-dinner speaking circuit? "I look at reform and, you know, I'm not actively involved in it at the moment, but I think the gap for another insurgency is actually bigger than it was 10 years ago." Mr Farage was asked if any Conservative MPs have got in contact who might be interested in a "gap in the political market". He said: "The Red Wallers know they're going to lose their seats? and if there was a coming together on the centre-Right, which is where the gap is, I think quite a few would." On how many, he replied: "Potentially, double figures." He added: "I think it needs to be more than just me, you know? You can have one person leading a party into a European election or something like that. A general election, you've got to have a range of talents. "I don't know what's going to happen, I don't know what Boris Johnson's going to do, but I see a bigger gap for insurgency today than I did before." Anger is building within the Conservative Party, with one MP accusing Mr Johnson of abandoning his colleagues. Mr Ellwood, chair of the defence select committee, said: "It is a grave moment for our party. Johnson has departed in his own style, kicking and screaming with so much drama, inflicting damage as he goes. "Johnson quit not only kicking the milk bottles on the way out but rallying other MPs to follow in order to inflict maximum damage to the party he claims to support." He added: "His actions are akin to mutiny." Meanwhile, Mr Loughton said: "My hopes for the future of Boris Johnson is that he will shut up and go away and let us get on with the business of running the country. ay he e "Boris is no longer the prime minister. He hasn't been prime minister for some time. ster. e d rought ely "His sad demise was brought about entirely at his own doing, frankly. And he's now decided unilaterally to leave Parliament before the report on him has actually been published and voted on and now appears to be blaming the Prime Minister for some sort of plot. I m "I'm a Conservative Member of Parliament. I'm not a member of the Boris party. And frankly, the mob - the mates of Boris - need to remember they are Conservative MPs. m rem Conservati "So, Boris, thank you very much for your service. Now just keep quiet and let the grown-ups in government who want to do government? get on with that job." up ment wh gover w 'I have discussed this with people close to Boris. I don't think he has any future in the Conservative Party' Graphic    Gra Tob Grave concern? Tobias EllwoodPictures: GETTY, PA Load-Date: June 12, 2023  End of Document
