   Boris Johnson government ‘always hoped’ Northern Ireland protocol would collapse – as it happened The Guardian (London) September 12, 2023 Tuesday 9:11 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:19 Length: 6414 words Byline: Andrew Sparrow Highlight: Lord Frost, Brexit negotiator for former PM, tells House of Lords that government never wanted ‘unsatisfactory’ protocol to work Body   block-time published-time 6.00pm BST   Early evening summary  Angela Rayner has given a “cast iron guarantee” that Labour would bring in a new bill to ban zero-hours contracts and repeal anti-strike laws within 100 days of a new government. The former Conservative leader William Hague has said it is time to ditch the triple lock on pensions – as figures showed the policy meant the state pension was likely to rise by 8.5% in April. Lord Frost has said that, when he and Boris Johnson negotiated the Northern Ireland protocol ahead of Brexit, they “always hoped” it would eventually collapse. (See 4.02pm. )Suella Braverman’s plan to clamp down on police officers who dance at Pride or wear badges could open the door to discrimination against marginalised communities, a senior police officer has claimed. The government and regulators may have broken the law by failing to stem raw sewage dumping into rivers by water companies in England, the new independent environmental watchdog has said. Two in five people admitted to hospital for planned care in England last year had their health worsen while they were on the NHS waiting list, a major survey reveals.     Angela Rayner at the TUC conference. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA       block-time published-time 5.59pm BST  This is from Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson’s former chief adviser, on hints that the Tories might drop their commitment to the triple lock for pensions at the next election. “PM, between Boris, Truss & you there’s only 1 part of the Vote Leave coalition we haven’t totally screwed: pensioners.” Sunak: Mmm I know, abolish the triple lock! Forsyth: Brilliant PM, shows you take unpopular decisions, totally on brand! enltr"PM, between Boris, Truss & you there's only 1 part of the Vote Leave coalition we haven't totally screwed: pensioners." Sunak: Mmm I know, abolish the triple lock! Forsyth: Brilliant PM, shows you take unpopular decisions, totally on brand! — Dominic Cummings (@Dominic2306) September 12, 2023 block-time published-time 5.51pm BST   Social mobility should not be judged just by how many working class people get top jobs, says Social Mobility Commission   It is wrong to assess social mobility just by how many working class people move into “top professional jobs”, according to the Social Mobility Commission. The commission, which was originally set up as the Child Poverty Commission under a law passed in the final weeks of the last Labour government, made the comment in an annual report  in which it argued traditional definitions of social mobility were too narrow. It said: Conventional approaches to social mobility have been too narrow, tending to define ‘the social mobility problem’ as one of equal access to professional and managerial occupations. This analysis has serious weaknesses, which are illustrated by the findings from this report and outlined below. The traditional approach focuses too much on the university route, pathways to professional careers, and long leaps in social mobility. But we need a wider focus. Thinking only about access to top professional jobs neglects far too many of those at the bottom. There are many people who cannot, or simply do not want to, take this route. Some do not want to move to a big city to get a top professional job. Some are not in a position to achieve that kind of long-upwards mobility – they may have left school without basic levels of reading or maths. For people in these positions, offers of internships at a top London law firm may be missing the point. Good, accessible, local jobs must be part of our mobility picture. The report does not prevent an overall, simple verdict on whether social mobility is getting better or worse. It says relative social mobility has remained stable. But it also says there have been “some concerning changes in absolute mobility”, and it says it has become harder for people to buy a home if their parents aren’t or weren’t homeowners. It says: On housing mobility, we have found a significant tightening of the link between parental home ownership and children’s home ownership. Worryingly, your parents’ ownership of their home has become a much better predictor of whether or not you will own yours. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.59am BST block-time published-time 5.19pm BST   Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, has said that a survey by the Care Quality Commission  showing that a quarter of patients on hospital waiting lists get worse while waiting for treatment (see 11.43am) is an indictment of the NHS. He says: After 13 years of Conservative rule, NHS waiting times are through the roof. Patients are being left for months or even years, and their conditions are worsening as a result. This is bad for their health, and it increases the overall bill for their care to the taxpayer. Labour will restore the NHS to good health, so it is there for us when we need it once again. We will train the doctors and nurses needed to treat patients on time again, and reform the service to make it fit for the future. block-time published-time 4.02pm BST   Lord Frost says he and Boris Johnson 'always hoped' Northern Ireland protocol would eventually collapse    Lord Frost has said that, when he and Boris Johnson negotiated the Northern Ireland protocol ahead of Brexit, they “always hoped” it would eventually collapse. It is not the first time that he has said they regarded the agreement as less than ideal, and not likely to last, but never before has been been quite this explicit, revealing that the Johnson administration wanted the protocol to fail. Frost made the comment yesterday in a debate in the House of Lords  on the protocol and the Windsor framework – the new version negotiated by Rishi Sunak intended to minimise problems it was causing in Northern Ireland. The protocol was necessary because Johnson wanted a version of Brexit that would take the UK out of the EU’s single market and customs union, but without controls on goods having to be introduced on the border between Ireland and Northern Ireland. The solution (the original protocol) involved checks and conditions being imposed on some goods going from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. Unionists hated it, but the deal broke the deadlock with Brussels and enabled Johnson to go into the 2019 election claiming to have an “oven-ready” Brexit agreement ready to so. Within weeks of his victory, the UK had formally left the EU. Frost, who was Johnson’s Brexit negotiator before becoming Brexit minister, told peers yesterday that the Johnson government never wanted the protocol to work. He said: The Johnson government, of which I was part, always took the view – many criticised us for taking it – that the protocol was unsatisfactory and temporary. We always hoped that, ultimately, divergence by GB would produce the collapse of the protocol arrangements, whether consensually through a vote, a further negotiation or otherwise. We always wanted something better. At the time Johnson strongly defended the protocol, falsely claiming  during the 2019 election campaign that it would not require traders in Northern Ireland to fill in new paperwork. In a speech to Policy Exchange  last year Frost said that the protocol was not perfect but that he and Johnson agreed it assuming “we could sort out the detail later”. He also said in the same speech that, when the protocol was agreed, he assumed relations with the EU would improve after Brexit and that they would find a way of making the protocol “workable”. At the time he also assumed the protocol would last until 2024, he said, by which time there would be “so much domestic reform and change within Great Britain … that it would be self-evidently attractive to Northern Ireland to end the protocol and put some other arrangements in place”. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.52pm BST block-time published-time 3.06pm BST  At the end of last week Sharon Graham, the Unite general secretary, used an article in the Sunday Times to suggest that Labour under Keir Starmer was too Blairite.  Today, in a statement issued in response to Angela Rayner’s speech, Graham was more positive. While reserving the right to be critical, she said Labour would be a clear improvement on the Tories. She said: The country clearly would be better off with a Labour government. There is no doubt. That said, as the general secretary of Unite, my job is to fight for workers and ensure Labour commits to making the lives of working people better. As with all things the devil will be in the detail and the words on the page. There can be no backtracking on the agreed workers’ rights. Britain is hurting and Labour needs to be bold. Other union leaders were less equivocal. Paul Nowak, the TUC general secretary, said: Angela Rayner set out a vision for a Britain that delivers for working people. Labour’s transformative new deal for working people stands in stark contrast to the Tories’ dire record on workers’ rights and pay … Make no mistake. Implementing the new deal would be the biggest upgrade in workers’ rights in a generation.  Christina McAnea, the Unison general secretary, said: Labour in government would dramatically improve the lives of working people and their families. It’s much needed after 13 years of the Conservatives trashing the economy, harming public services and letting living standards slide. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.53pm BST block-time published-time 2.38pm BST   Ofsted says schools affected by Raac will not be inspected this term    Ofsted has announced that it will not inspect schools, nurseries or colleges affected by the reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete (Raac) crisis in England. It said: This term we will avoid inspecting any education setting that is on the Department for Education’s published list of education settings affected by Raac. These settings will be removed from our scheduling and will not be selected for inspection during the term. Ofsted also said that schools affected indirectly, such as those hosting pupils from other schools temporarily exiled because of Raac, will be able to defer inspections, but emergency inspections involving safeguarding concerns could still go ahead if necessary. The announcement will come as a relief for headteachers at schools affected, who faced the potential headache of preparing for an Ofsted inspection while trying to ensure that their buildings wouldn’t collapse. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.42pm BST block-time published-time 2.25pm BST   Rail fares in England set to rise by almost 8% if tied to wage growth   Rail fares in England will rise by almost 8% if the government uses the same formula as this year to calculate the 2024 increase, campaigners have said, pushing up the cost of many season tickets to more than £5,000 a year. Gwyn Topham has the story.  Related:  Rail fares in England set to rise by almost 8% if tied to wage growth block-time published-time 2.13pm BST   Triple lock for pensions 'not sustainable' in very long term, says work and pensions secretary    Mel Stride, the work and pensions secretary, has said that the triple lock for pensions is not sustainable in the very long term. In an interview on the World at One, he stressed that the government remains committed to it for now. But he conceded that eventually it would prove too expensive. He told the programme: This argument has been around for a long time, and understandably so because the Office for Budget Responsibility, the main independent forecaster, comes forward with the fiscal sustainability report on an annual basis. And it casts out 50 years, and it looks at the impact of the increase in the state pension on the triple lock, amongst other issues, and what that does to the parent finances. So we’ve known for a long time, that in the very, very long term, you’re absolutely right, it is not sustainable. But of course, what I’m dealing with is now and where we stand at the moment, is we remain committed to the triple lock. And that’s the path that we will be taking. But as to the future, and after future general elections, and so on and so forth, who knows. But that’s the position we’re in at present. Stride’s comment will revive speculation that the Conservatives may not commit to keeping the triple lock in their election manifesto. The former Tory leader, William Hague, has used his column in the Times today to argue that both main parties should accept that promising to keep it would be reckless. (See 10.49am. ) In his interview, echoing the line used by No 10 (see 12.50pm  ), Stride refused to categorically rule out the government revising the earnings inflation figure used in the triple lock calculation so as to exclude bonuses. This is not policy – and sources have implied it is not being seriously considered as an option – but if the government were to apply this approach, pensions might go up next year by 7.8%, not 8.5%. Asked if the government would do this, Stride replied: These are all decisions that I have to take with the chancellor as part of a very clear process, a statutory process actually, that I go through in the autumn. So I didn’t want me to get into the weeds of exactly how I’m going to go about that. But the overarching point about the triple lock is that we remain committed to it. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.15pm BST block-time published-time 1.21pm BST   Police leader questions Braverman clampdown on officers’ impartiality   Suella Braverman’s plan to clamp down on police officers who dance at Pride or wear badges could open the door to discrimination against marginalised communities, Paul Fotheringham, the president of the  Police  Superintendents’ Association (PSA), has claimed. Rajeev Syal has the story here.  Related:  Police leader questions Braverman clampdown on officers’ impartiality block-time published-time 12.50pm BST   No 10 insists government remains committed to triple lock, implying state pensions set to rise by 8.5% next year   At the Downing Street lobby briefing the PM’s spokesperson insisted that the government remains committed to the triple lock, implying state pensions are likely to rise by 8.5% next year. As the Institute for Fiscal Studies says, today’s average earnings figures mean it is “very likely”  that the state pension will rise by 8.5% next year under the triple lock, which says pensions have to rise in line with earnings, price inflation or by 2.5% – whichever is highest. Today’s figures put the earnings measure at 8.5%, and it will only be trumped if the inflation figure used for the triple lock calculation (the rate for September) comes out higher. There are reports that the Treasury may try to push down the 8.5% figure by using the figure for wage inflation excluding bonuses. In the Times  Jack Barnett reports: Treasury officials have suggested that the government may commit to uprating the lock in line with earnings growth excluding bonuses, to reduce the strain on the public finances ahead of Jeremy Hunt’s autumn statement  on 22 November. The average weekly figure excluding bonuses was 7.8% in the three months to July, according to the Office for National Statistics. Asked about this option, the PM’s spokesperson said that the triple lock policy (which says the earnings figure should include bonuses) remains in place. But, when asked whether today’s figures mean that the state pension will definitely rise at least by 8.5% next year, as the triple lock formula implies it should, he said that would have to be confirmed later. He explained: You know there’s a formal process for this when it comes to uprating but we remain committed to the triple lock which has seen 200,000 pensioners lifted out of absolute poverty after housing costs are taken into account. The spokesperson, who is a civil servant answering questions on behalf of the government, said he could not comment on what the Conservatives might say about the triple lock in their election manifesto. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.46pm BST block-time published-time 12.20pm BST   Tories claim Labour pledge to repeal anti-union legislation would lead to 'more strikes'   The Conservatives say a Labour government would mean “more strikes”. Greg Hands, the Tory chair, put out this statement in response to Angela Rayner’s speech, and in particular to her declaration that Labour would repeal the Trade Union Act 2016 and the Strikes Act within its first 100 days in office. (See 11.02am. ) Hands said: The mask has slipped. Despite Keir Starmer’s short-term promises to be pro-business, his deputy leader is committing to Labour’s union paymasters that they will have more control over Britain’s economy. Reversing anti-strike laws will mean more strikes, damaging the economy and disrupting the lives of hardworking people. block-time published-time 12.04pm BST   Rayner uses speech to TUC to set out Labour policies that would benefit unions and workers   In her speech to the TUC, Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, urged delegates to “get the word out” about what the party is promising for workers. Here is the passage in her speech where she summed up what Labour is proposing. It came immediately after the passage in the speech where she set out five measures the party would take on blacklisting. (See 11.09am. ) Rayner said: We will give trade unions a new legal, reasonable right to access workplaces like your sister unions have in Australia, New Zealand, the Nordic states, and more. This will be underpinned by a regulated legal framework. There will be clear responsibilities and rules for all sides to follow allowing you to meet, represent, recruit and organise members, so that you can get on with your jobs to build stronger, happier and more productive workplaces without threat or menace from rogue employers. As we’ve seen with Amazon, a small minority of employers are taking advantage of the lack of regulations to frustrate the process. This is neither fair to workers nor productive for our wider economy, and it only frustrates disputes, making it harder to come to a resolution. So we will also simplify the statutory recognition process to ensure that gig economy and remote workers can meaningfully organise through trade unions. And we’ll level up the rules to allow trade unions to use secure and private electronic balloting when engaging, communicating with and polling their members, including for workplace ballots. And that’s still not all. We’ll boost collective bargaining both at the firm level and sectorally, starting with a fair pay agreement in adult social care. We will empower workers, the trade unions that represent them and employers in this sector to negotiate fair pay, terms and conditions - like training, in-staff benefits and more. As a former social care worker, I cannot overstate the difference this will make, not only to these low-paid and far too often overlooked workers, but also to our entire health care system, weighed down by years of Tory neglect. We’ll also protect existing sector-wide deals like the fire and rescue services’ national joint council and support workers to meaningfully organise together to improve their terms and conditions. This is because we agree with the OECD that collective bargaining isn’t just good for workers, but it can also be key to helping companies and their staff adapt to technological and societal change. And there’s even more. Day one basic rights. A ban on zero-hour contracts. An end to fire and rehire. Family-friendly working. Strengthen sick pay, making it available to all workers, including the lowest earners, and from day one of sickness. We’ll go faster and quicker to end the gender pay gap. Address unequal pay. Tackle sexual harassment at work. Put mental health on a par with physical health. And we’ll bring in a proper living wage that people can actually live on.      Angela Rayner speaking at the TUC conference. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA     block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.10pm BST block-time published-time 11.47am BST   Ministers may have broken law over sewage dumping in England, says watchdog   The government and regulators may have broken the law by failing to stem raw sewage dumping into rivers by water companies in England , the new independent environmental watchdog has said. As Sandra Laville reports, the Office for Environmental Protection, which was set up after Brexit to replace the enforcement powers of the European Commission, said an investigation suggested the government, the Environment Agency and Ofwat may be failing to comply with environmental law and allowing raw sewage to be discharged by water companies more frequently than the law allows. The full story is here.  Related:  Ministers may have broken law over sewage dumping in England, says watchdog block-time published-time 11.43am BST  Four in 10 people admitted for planned hospital treatment in England say their health got worse while on the NHS waiting list, a large patient survey has found. As PA Media reports, 24% of people on the list – which currently stands at 7.6 million patients – said their health got a bit worse while waiting for treatment, and a further 17% said it got much worse. The annual survey of hospital inpatients published by the Care Quality Commission (CQC) also found 39% of people surveyed in 2022 would have liked to have been admitted sooner, up on the 35% the previous year, PA says. block-time published-time 11.31am BST  Ed Miliband, the shadow secretary for climate and net zero, has been granted an urgent question at 12.30pm on the failure of any company to bid to set up a new offshore windfarms  in the latest government rights auction. enltrAlso confirmed:  Urgent question from @Ed_Miliband  : To ask the Secretary of State for Energy Security and Net Zero if she will make a statement on the implications for offshore wind of the Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 5. — UK House of Commons (@HouseofCommons) September 12, 2023 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.05pm BST block-time published-time 11.21am BST   Rayner ended her speech by saying that the Labour movement had to “come together” to win the next election. And she urged delegates to “get the word out” about the new deal for working people. In rhetorical terms, it was all a bit underwhelming – more routine, than barmstorming. But what matters is the substance, and Rayner was outlining a chunky package of measures on employment rights that would make a real difference to unions and their members. As Tom Harwood from GB News reports, she got a standing ovation. enltr“To get this victory we have to come together, stand together, and campaign side by side.” Rayner pleads with TUC to back Labour. The message seems to have gone down well in the room. Standing ovation. pic.twitter.com/xpXaQzQJpT  — Tom Harwood (@tomhfh) September 12, 2023 block-time published-time 11.12am BST   Rayner confirms that Labour will allow unions to ballot their members electronically over strike action. Under the current rules, unions have to ballot their members by post, which is more time consuming and expensive. Critics point out that the government has imposed this rule on unions even though the Conservative party uses electronic voting for its own leadership elections. block-time published-time 11.09am BST   Rayner outlines measures Labour will take to end blacklisting of union activists    Rayner says Labour will update trade union laws to make them fit for the 21st century. The laws affecting union reps and officials do not take into account technological advancements, she says. And she says Labour will end the blacklisting of union activists. She says this will include four measures: First, we will update regulations to outlaw the use of predictive technologies for blacklisting and safeguard against singling out workers for mistreatment or the sack without any evidence of human interaction. Second, we will act to end the loophole that allows employers to pass the dirty work down to third party contractors, so that any third party found to be carrying out blacklisting can legally be held to account. Third, we will give employment tribunals the power to order the destruction of any list – digital or not – to stop lists from being hidden or used again. Finally, we will ensure lessons are learnt from past historic injustices, so that these scandals can never happen again. We support a full investigation into the violent events at Orgreave, and in government we would launch a review into and release the official documents relating to the Cammell Laird prosecutions. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.07pm BST block-time published-time 11.02am BST   Rayner says Labour would repeal Trade Union Act and Strikes Act within first 100 days in office    Rayner says the economy has been left “shattered” by “13 years of Tory failure”. The government has not just turned its back on vulnerable workers, but on the whole economy. Tory ministers are the only workers who can get fired and rehired on better conditions, failing upwards, she says. She says the Strikes Act is “spiteful” legislation. Workers don’t want to go on strike, she says. She says Labour will repeal this within its first 100 days in office. UPDATE: Rayner said: The Tories pushed through the 2016 Trade Union Act, preventing fair bargaining and holding back living standards. And this year they gave us the minimum service levels bill [the Strikes Act] … Let me tell you loud and clear, the next Labour government will ask parliament to repeal these anti-trade union laws within our first 100 days so that you can get on with your jobs of fighting for better for your members. The Trade Union Act 2016  says that 50% of union members must take part in a strike ballot for its result to be valid, and that in key public services, like health and education, 40% of eligible members must vote for a strike for it to be allowed. And the Strikes (Minimum Service Levels) Act 2023 says that, in key public services, if unions do vote to go on strike, some staff must carry on working to provide a minimum level of service. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.19pm BST block-time published-time 10.59am BST   Rayner is now talking about the impact that Labour policies had on her when she was a young, poor single mum in the 1990s. And she is using the levelling up passage briefed overnight. (See 9.11am. )  block-time published-time 10.57am BST   Rayner is speaking now. She says she comes to the conference with one message: that Labour will build an economy that works for working people, with a new deal for working people. She says Labour will bring forward its employment rights bill in the first 100 days of the election. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.08pm BST block-time published-time 10.51am BST   Angela Rayner's speech to TUC conference    Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, is meant to be giving her speech to the TUC conference. But they are running a bit late. She should be starting soon. block-time published-time 10.49am BST   William Hague urges both Tories and Labour to drop triple lock for pensions   At the weekend Rishi Sunak refused to say the Conservatives would commit to keeping the triple lock  in their next election manifesto. In the past Labour has sounded pro triple lock, but maybe Angela Rayner had a read of William Hague ’s Times column  before her interview this morning in which she said she could not make an unfunded commitment for the manifesto. (See 10.29am. ) In his column Hague, a former Tory leader, says that the triple lock should go and that both main parties have to operate a non-aggression pact on this issue to ensure it happens. He says: The IFS estimate  is that the triple lock will cost between £5 billion and £45 billion extra, per year, on top of inflation, by 2050. Over 50 years, the Office for Budget Responsibility says it could add up to nearly £1 trillion. Our entire GDP is just over £2 trillion. A runaway train is a fair analogy, because we don’t know where it will end up, or at what speed; it’s nearly going too fast already for the train drivers to slow it down, but if they don’t it will end in disaster. The train drivers understand this. Asked on the way back from India, Rishi Sunak reiterated that the triple lock is government policy but declined to speculate about his election manifesto. The Labour party is in a similar position. Neither can afford to commit electoral suicide by being alone in suggesting that some change is needed, even though that is obvious. Sometimes in politics, you have to help each other a bit. In 1995, I was the pensions minister who took through parliament the equalisation of pension ages, giving 15 years’ notice that the women’s pension age would rise in slow stages between 2010 and 2020. It was a huge cut in future spending but essential to sustain the whole system. Opposite me for Labour was the late Donald Dewar, a brilliant debater. Over many weeks of arguments, he asked me hundreds of questions, but with a twinkle in his eye. It was clear that Labour would quietly accept this huge change. We both knew it had to happen and that doing it over a long period across parties was the only way. block-time published-time 10.29am BST   Rayner refuses to say Labour committed to keeping triple lock for pensions   Here are the main lines from Angela Rayner’ s morning interview round. Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, refused to say Labour would keep the triple lock for pensioners after the next election. Under the triple lock, the state pension increases every year in line with inflation, the rise in wages, or by 2.5% – whichever is highest. As the Institute for Fiscal Studies says in an analysis , today’s earnings figures suggest the pensions increase is likely to be 8.5%. Labour promised to keep the triple lock in its 2019 manifesto, but on BBC Breakfast this morning, asked if Labour would make the promise again, Rayner said: Since 2019 the government have crashed the economy and we’re in a very different place. What Labour have said is we’ll look at that in the run-up to a general election but we will not make unfunded spending commitments, because Liz Truss did that and she crashed the economy. Rayner defended Labour’s decision to rule out a wealth tax.  Asked if a wealth tax could be implemented at some future date, she said: Well, Rachel [Reeves] has already said we’ve ruled that out. We’ve got the highest level of taxation under the Tories that we’ve had in a generation. We can’t just tax our way out of this situation. Rayner defended the party’s decision to consult business thoroughly on its plan to reform workers’ rights. When it was put to her on the Today programme that this showed Labour was watering down its policies, she replied: Consulting with the unions, with employers, with business [is good] because ultimately I can announce the new deal for working people but if it’s not embedded within the business and the trade union movement, and they haven’t got buy-in, and it can’t practically work, then it would fail. I want it to succeed. I know it can succeed. But the only way it will succeed is by working in partnership, which is exactly the approach that I’m taking. She said the party would deliver its new deal for working people within the first 100 days of a Labour government.She said that she saw herself as another Barbara Castle.  When Nick Robinson put it to her on the Today programme that unions saw her as a deputy leader like John Prescott, lacking real power, Rayner replied: “I think I’m more of a Barbara Castle.” Castle was never deputy PM, but she was a hugely influential cabinet minister doing different jobs (including first secretary of state) under Harold Wilson and she is often seen as someone who should have been prime minister.Rayner told Sky News that she wished she could give up vaping. She said: I wish I could give up vaping. I’m going to do my utmost to make sure that I do that. And young people need to know that vaping is not a way forward and they should not get addicted to it because it is incredibly addictive and costly as well. So they need to stop. She was responding to a question about reports that the government is planning to ban single-use vapes. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.44am BST block-time published-time 9.57am BST  Rishi Sunak is chairing cabinet this morning. Here are some of the ministers arriving for the meeting.     Gillian Keegan, the education secretary, arriving for cabinet this morning. Photograph: Peter Nicholls/Getty Images      Michelle Donelan, the science secretary, arriving for cabinet. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA      Steve Barclay, the health secretary, arriving for cabinet. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA      Tom Tugendhat, the security minister, and Lucy Frazer, the culture secretary, arriving for cabinet. Photograph: Peter Nicholls/Getty Images       block-time published-time 9.38am BST   TUC says new polling shows 'overwhelming support' for Labour's new deal for working people policies   Angela Rayner will be promoting Labour’s “new deal for working people”  in her speech to the TUC. In the Labour reshuffle last week, as well as being made shadow levelling up secretary, Rayner retained overall responsiblity for this agenda. She helped to develop the policies as shadow secretary of state for the future of work, one of her previous frontbench jobs. This morning the TUC has released polling suggesting that the key proposals in the new deal for working people are popular with voters. Here is an extract from the news release, summarising the results of the polling by Opinium.  Day one rights : Two in three (67%) support all workers having a day one right to protection from unfair dismissal – including 61% of Conservative 2019 voters. Sixteen per cent of UK adults oppose it.  Gig economy rights : Six in 10 (62%) support giving those working in the gig economy new rights and protections such as sick pay and holiday pay – including 59% of Conservative 2019 voters. In contrast, just 6% of UK adults oppose it.  Ban on fire and rehire : Two in three (67%) support a ban on fire and rehire, including 64% of Conservative 2019 voters. In contrast, 17% of UK adults oppose it.  Ban on zero-hours contracts: Six in 10 (63%) support a ban on zero-hours contracts – including 60% of Conservative 2019 voters. In contrast, 14% of UK adults oppose it.  Union access to workplaces : Over half (51%) support giving trade unions a right to access any workplace to tell workers about the benefits of joining a trade union – including four in 10 (38%) Conservative 2019 voters. In contrast, 17% of UK adults oppose it. The TUC said this showed “overwhelming support” for the Labour agenda. As Labour discovered in 2019, the popularity of measures in a party’s manifesto (measured by polling) doesn’t necessarily mean that the public will vote for it. A lot depends on the credibility of the leaders who are promising to deliver the policies. But on this measure , Labour is doing well too. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.50am BST block-time published-time 9.11am BST   Angela Rayner to tell TUC Labour policies can deliver proper levelling up and that Tory version is ‘sham and scam’   Good morning. One of the signs of confidence in a political party is when it can successfully appropriate the slogans of its opponents and today we are going to see another example of that from Labour. Keir Starmer did it last year when he declared that he would Make Brexit Work.  And today, in her speech to the TUC conference, Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, will insist that Labour has the policies that could deliver proper levelling up. She will argue that having workers in unionised jobs helps levelling up. And she will argue that the Tory version of the policy – dreamed up by Boris Johnson, and half-heartedly maintained by his successors – has been “a sham and a scam”. Rayner was made shadow levelling up secretary in last week’s shadow cabinet reshuffle and this is her first speech in this role. According to extracts released in advance, she will say: As a young single mum, it was a Labour government that levelled the playing field for me. When I most needed it, a council house gave me and my son a secure home instead of surfing sofas. That in turn meant I could go out and find the job that I built a life upon. The minimum wage meant I earned more. A local authority job gave me better skills at work, and a Sure Start centre better skills as a parent. And joining a union changed my whole life - and meant I could change other people’s lives too. That kind of levelling up transformed my life and my prospects - because it was done right. A house and a good, unionised job, with decent conditions, a thriving community empowered to create good local services and educational opportunities - these things were my lifeline, and they are what real levelling-up mean to me. They are what levelling up could have been and could still be. But everything I relied upon to improve my life and my community has instead been levelled down by the Tories. With housebuilding and wages plummeting across the whole country, this government’s version of levelling up is a sham - and a scam. Rayner has been doing an interview round this morning. I will post highlights from what she has been saying shortly. Here is the agenda for the day. Morning: Rishi Sunak chairs cabinet. 10am: Keir Starmer takes part in a Q&A with sixth formers in Liverpool. 10.20am: Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, speaks at the Police Superintendents’ Association’s annual conference. 10.45am: Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, speaks to the TUC conference. 11am: The Social Mobility Commission publishes its annual report. 11.30am: Alex Chalk, the justice secretary, takes questions in the Commons. 2pm: Michelle Donelan, the science secretary, hosts a roundtable at Downing Street about the online safety bill. If you want to contact me, do try the “send us a message” feature. You’ll see it just below the byline – on the left of the screen, if you are reading on a laptop or a desktop. This is for people who want to message me directly. I find it very useful when people message to point out errors (even typos – no mistake is too small to correct). Often I find your questions very interesting, too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either in the comments below the line, privately (if you leave an email address and that seems more appropriate), or in the main blog, if I think it is a topic of wide interest. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.57pm BST Load-Date: September 13, 2023  End of Document
