   Braverman: Government will do whatever it takes to protect UK from migrant 'hurricane' The Daily Telegraph (London) October 4, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 2394 words Body   A "HURRICANE" of migration is coming, Suella Braverman warned yesterday, as she pledged the Government would do "whatever it takes" to protect the UK's borders. In her speech to the Conservative Party conference, the Home Secretary said "millions more" migrants could come to the UK unless the Government took decisive action against "uncontrolled and unmanageable" illegal immigration and reduced legal migration to "reasonable" levels. She sought to present the Conservatives as the only party capable of challenging the "dense net" of outdated international rules on migration that she blamed Labour for "turbocharging" by passing the "misnamed" Human Rights Act. "I am surprised they didn't call it the Criminal Rights Act," she said in a speech that won her a minute's standing ovation in a packed main conference hall. She said it had left the UK unprepared for the "unprecedented" global mass migration that the UK now faced. Recalling her parents' arrival in the UK as immigrants, she said: "The wind of change that carried my own parents across the globe in the 20th century was a mere gust compared to the hurricane that is coming." Her language appeared to be a nod to Harold Macmillan, the former prime minister, whose "Winds of Change" speech, made during a 1960 visit to South Africa, acknowledged that Britain's colonial hold on the continent was waning. Mrs Braverman said successive Governments had been "too unwilling" to overhaul the UK's legal framework because they were "far too squeamish about being smeared as racist to properly bring order to the chaos". She said the "racist" smears had been levelled against Baroness Thatcher, David Cameron, Rishi Sunak, herself and even Sir Winston Churchill but she claimed they would not stop the Government taking action it believed necessary. "We will do whatever it takes to stop the boats and deter bogus asylum seekers," said Mrs Braverman. "We will also ensure that legal migration comes down to reasonable levels and that it occurs only when there is a clear benefit to the British people." Mrs Braverman and Robert Jenrick, the immigration minister, believe Britain must be prepared to quit the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) if Strasbourg judges block the Government's Rwanda deportation policy, a measure to which the Prime Minister is said to be "allergic". The Supreme Court will begin deciding next week whether the flights are lawful, the culmination of a legal battle that began when a Strasbourg judge authorised an 11th-hour interim injunction 16 months ago blocking the flights. Mrs Braverman claimed polling backed her hardline approach and that the Conservative Party was the "trade union of the British people" against a Labour Party and its supporters who dismissed a robust approach to law and order or secure borders as "unedifying". She branded them the "luxury beliefs brigade" who sat in "ivory towers telling ordinary people that they are morally deficient because they dare to get upset about the impact of illegal migration, net zero or habitual criminals". "They like open borders. The migrants coming in won't be taking their jobs. In fact, they are more likely to have them mowing their lawns or cleaning their homes," said Mrs Braverman. "They love soft sentences. The criminals who benefit from such ostentatious compassion won't be terrorising their streets or grooming their children. "They are desperate to reverse Brexit. They think patriotism is embarrassing and have no use for a British passport if it doesn't entitle them to live in their second homes in Tuscany, Dordogne or Barcelona." On law and order, she contrasted a Conservative Government that stood up for the police against a "woke" Labour Party that wanted "to see them take the knee" and sympathised with the "eco idiots that block roads and stop mums from taking their kids to school". "And to those who ask whether Labour can be trusted to fight crime. I have a two-word answer: Sadiq Khan." She claimed Britain would go "properly woke" if Sir Keir Starmer became prime minister. "Things are bad enough already," she said. "We see it in Whitehall, in museums and galleries, in the police, and even in leading companies in the City. Under the banner of diversity, equity, and inclusion, official policies have been embedded that distort the whole purpose of these institutions. "Highly controversial ideas are presented to workforces and the public as if they are motherhood and apple pie. Gender ideology. White privilege. Anti-British history." The Home Secretary confirmed she would also bring forward a new law, aimed at preventing registered sex offenders from "changing their identities". She said: "I don't care if anyone thinks this is interfering with their human rights. It's time to worry less about the rights of sexual predators and more about the rights of victims." Last night, Kemi Badenoch, the Business Secretary who is considered Mrs Braverman's rival in any future Tory leadership race, warned that politicians needed to be careful about how immigration policies were discussed. Speaking at an event hosted by The Spectator, she said: "We live in a multiracial society. We're very comfortable with that because if we weren't you wouldn't have a Prime Minister that we have, we wouldn't have the Home Secretary or the Business Secretary that we have. "But we have to be very careful about how we explain and express immigration policies, so that people aren't getting echoes of things that were less palatable." NHS told to ditch pronouns guidance NHS officials have been ordered to ditch a training manual that told staff to declare their pronouns to patients. Steve Barclay, the Health Secretary, has instructed that the materials be withdrawn amid fury over the "ideological dogma" pervading the service. The training module, issued by Health Education England, said doctors, nurses and other staff should start conversations with patients by declaring their own pronoun. Staff were advised to inform patients of pronouns - such as he/him, she/her or they/them - in order to create a "safe space for trans, non-binary, intersex and gender non-conforming people". Mr Barclay has intervened and ordered that the training material be withdrawn, having become incensed at the "woke agenda" being promoted within the public sector. He used his speech to announce that trans women would be banned from female wards, under plans to restore "common sense" to the NHS. He also announced the return of "sex specific" language to the NHS, after references to women were expunged from advice on the menopause and on diseases such as cervical and ovarian cancer. Mr Barclay said he had intervened "and stopped the NHS ordering staff to declare their pronouns to each new patient" as part of efforts to restore "simple common sense" to the NHS. "I know as Conservatives, we know what a woman is," he said, to applause. Helen Joyce, director of advocacy for campaign group Sex Matters, welcomed the shift. She said: "During the past decade, the entire NHS has been captured by the extreme trans activist lobby. "They've written policies saying that patients' self-declared 'gender identities' are more important than their actual biological sex, which is absurd when you're talking about health care. And they say everyone, both staff and patients, should declare their pronouns, when the reality is it's obvious what sex almost everyone is at first sight. This ideology needs to be removed from every part of the NHS." Mr Barclay called for a "relentless focus on patient outcomes" and prioritisation of frontline resources. "It does not mean spending huge sums of taxpayer's money on diversity consultants or hiring bloated internal diversity and inclusion teams," he said. "And it does not mean ignoring patient's voices - especially women's voices when it comes to the importance of biological sex in healthcare. If we do not get this right now, the long-term consequences could be very serious for the protection of women and future generations." Mrs Braverman gave her backing to the plans, telling broadcasters on a visit to Bolton: "Trans women have no place in women's wards or indeed any safe space relating to biological women. "And the Health Secretary is absolutely right to make it clear that biological men should not have treatments in the same wards and in the same safe spaces as biological women. This is about protecting women's dignity, and women's safety and women's privacy." A spokesman for Stonewall, the gay rights charity, said: "This is a cynical attempt by the Secretary of State to 'look busy' instead of getting on with the graft of implementing the Women's Health Strategy, and, besides being unworkable, all it will achieve is to restrict access to healthcare for trans women, by making it humiliating and dangerous." Broadband boost for remote rural areas Michelle Donelan yesterday promised rural homes and businesses that they would gain access to state of the art satellite broadband during the coming months. The Science Secretary said she would ensure that the most hard-toreach rural areas would benefit from the technology. It follows concerns that isolated areas were losing out in terms of the internet service they receive. Ms Donelan said: "I am announcing that in the coming months we will be giving access to the very, very hard-toreach rural homes and businesses to get state-of-the-art satellite broadband to unlock the potential in these rural areas. "And I'm also announcing a new £60million regional innovation fund - a cash injection that will be felt almost immediately." She also pledged to spend £8million more on scholarships for studies in artificial intelligence, "giving 800 more people the opportunity to excel in AI and cementing our places as leading the global conversation on AI safety". And she announced a review into the use of sex and gender questions in "scientific research and statistics", including in public bodies. "We will not sit idly by and watch an intolerant view stifle the light of science," said Ms Donelan. She added: "The review will leave no stone unturned in the effort to protect scientific integrity and to let our worldclass scientific community accurately get on with their jobs. We are safeguarding scientific research from the denial of biology and the steady creep of political correctness. We are taking a stand before it suffocates Britain's very identity and our values entirely." Starmer is a political jellyfish, claims Gove Michael Gove used his speech to hit out at Sir Keir, labelling him the "jellyfish of British politics". The Levelling-Up Secretary said the Labour leader's changing stance on Brexit showed he was "transparent, spineless and swept along by the tide". He added that although the Government was on track to build one million new homes in the current parliament, "many more" homes needed to be built. Mr Gove told delegates that the Conservatives had a "record to be proud of ". "It is a record that everyone of us should be proclaiming every single day from now until the next general election because this is a record which will give us victory," he said. "We will take the fight to the Labour Party. The party of Jeremy Corbyn and his self-proclaimed friend Sir Keir Starmer. "Sir Keir, who was against Brexit, then wanted to accept Brexit, then wanted a second referendum on Brexit, then he said that he wanted to make Brexit work, and then just last month, he said he wanted a Brexit which was actually identical to EU membership. "He was saying, as he always does, whatever he thought people in the audience wanted to hear. Sir Keir Starmer is the jellyfish of British politics. He is transparent, spineless and swept along by the tide," he concluded. He added: "We are on track to deliver a million new homes in this parliament. But we need many more. Our long-term plan for housing will deliver the attractive, affordable new homes that we need. "We will build in the heart of towns and cities, and on brownfield land because that cuts commuting times, it helps revitalise high streets and it protects the green belt." Mental illness 'too readily diagnosed' People who are "too readily" diagnosed as suffering from mental health conditions are driving a rise in benefit claims, the Work and Pensions Secretary has said. Mel Stride said "labelling" by society and the socialisation of mental health issues had contributed to a surge in welfare payments. "It's a good thing that we talk about mental health, a good thing that people get the treatment that they wouldn't have in the past," he told a fringe event. However, Mr Stride suggested that society was "leaning in too hard" to the idea that all people with mental health problems were too sick to work. "[There] is a question mark to what degree are we too readily identifying individuals as being [ill] and then consequently doing various things as a result of that? To what extent are we leaning in too hard into some of that?" He blamed lockdown and social media use for a "big surge" in mental health problems among younger people. Mental health conditions have been the main driver of the post-pandemic rise in long-term sickness. A record 2.6million people are economically inactive for long-term health reasons, representing a rise of around half a million compared with pre-pandemic levels. Sir Iain Duncan Smith, former Tory leader, said GPs had become "frightened about mental health issues", leading many to sign patients off work for extended periods. Waiting game Hour-long queues for May's 'Abuse' Delegates queued for an hour as they waited for Theresa May to sign copies of her new book. The Abuse of Power, Mrs May's debut book, focuses on "corruption and self-enrichment" in government and was published to mixed reviews in September. Those queuing up told ITV News Politics they admired her "personable" qualities, with one adding Mrs May ran a "steady ship" in her three-year premiership. Making eyes Farage and Patel unite at karaoke night Nigel Farage and Dame Priti Patel delighted conference partygoers as they sang along to Frankie Valli's Can't Take My Eyes Off You. The former Ukip leader attended his first gathering of the Tory faithful in more than three decades before he joined Dame Priti at a GB News party in Manchester. Separate footage posted online featured Dame Priti singing Angels by Robbie Williams at the close of the night. Graphic    Reporting by Charles Hymas, Laura Donnelly, Daniel Martin and Szu Ping ChanRishi Sunak, the Prime Minister, holds a meeting with his staff in his hotel room ahead of his speech to the Conservative Party conference in Manchester todayWIRE PA ROUSSEAU/ STEFANNigel Farage and Dame Priti Patel belt out 'Can't Take My Eyes Off You' at the conference karaoke session Load-Date: October 4, 2023  End of Document
