   Brexit and the problem of square-the-circle thinking; Letters Financial Times (London, England) June 12, 2023 Monday Edition 1, European Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 18 Length: 305 words Body   The problem Robert Shrimsley addresses ("Thatcherites lost their Brexit and their party", Opinion, June 1) is the cavernous gulf between winning the referendum on quitting the EU and having policies to deal with the complexities that follow. Brexit promised voters a multitude of outcomes. But a rational Brexit policy was impossible for this smorgasbord of Brexits. Dissimulation became embedded. The "thoughtful" Lord Hannan - as Shrimsley describes the former MEP eurosceptic Daniel Hannan - is an exemplar of the wider problem. Here was a man who wanted a sovereignty that would be different from and better than the sovereignty the UK exercised to initiate the single market. Hannan supported this single market. He also, notably, claimed we wouldn't leave. "Absolutely nobody is talking about threatening our place in the single market," he claimed in May 2016, just weeks before the vote. Hannan has also claimed deregulation could be a Brexit benefit but the whole point of the single market is that harmonised regulation would enable easier access, important for small firms, to a huge market and so encourage actual competition. Competitive deregulation to reach some ideal tends rather to put up obstacles when markets are differently regulated. Of course we could have argued for reform within the single market but, oh dear, that scope for sovereignty has now passed. Today's free marketeers have helped sabotage a key Thatcher policy. Their square-the-circle thinking is characteristic of both right and left marginal groups for whom recruitment to a cause has priority over the consistency needed for practical contact with reality. Seeking to hide behind alibis is really no substitute for the serious rethinking of Brexit that Britain now needs. William Dixon London SE18, UK David Wilson Walton-on-the-Naze, Essex, UK Graphic    India plans to drop Darwin and the periodic table from school textbooks Load-Date: June 11, 2023  End of Document
