   Brexit is costing us dear: BrewDog boss The Press and Journal June 29, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Aberdeen Journals Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 339 words Byline: ANDY PHILIP Body   Th e c h i e f of Aberdeenshire- based BrewDog has condemned Brexit for heaping costs on his business across Europe. Co-founder James Watt's company has businesses in France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands. In a broadcast interview, he said the Conservatives had "massively handicapped" UK companies with Brexit. "Getting our beer to those bars is now significantly more expensive, significantly more difficult," he told Bloomberg. "Getting beer to our customers in Europe has been significantly harder. "For me it's massively handicapped UK companies that do business in Europe, with zero benefit at all. "I think it's been tragic for UK business. I think a lot of the economic issues the UK saw over the last 12 to 24 months - worse inflation; difficulty doing business - is a result of the catastrophic decision to leave the EU and cripple UK business for no reason." Earlier this month, Brewdog reported a third year of losses, a cumulative £52.4 million. It was last profitable in 2019. Losses coincided with the firm shutting some UK pubs, citing costs and the energy crisis. There has been international expansion, including a new bar in the heart of Las Vegas. BrewDog plans to open more bars in UK airports and train stations. Sales have improved with revenue up to £321.2m. Richard Thomson, SNP business spokesman at Westminster, and MP for Gordon where Brewdog is based, blamed the big parties for "trashing" the economy. "There is no doubt that Brexit has made the costof-living crisis worse - and it has set the UK economy on a path to long-term decline," he said. A UK Department of Business and Trade spokesperson said: "Latest figures show trade with the EU was worth £772 billion last year, soaring 31% in current prices compared to 2021, and 14% higher in current prices than before the pandemic. "We have a package of support tailored to exporters of all sizes. This includes our Export Suppor-t Service, International Trade Advisers and UK Export Finance, all targeted at getting businesses across the UK economy exporting more." Graphic    TRADE WOES: Brexit has crippled UK business for no good reason, says BrewDog co-founder James Watt. Load-Date: June 29, 2023  End of Document
