   Brexit has spoiled trips to our dream home in Sicily i-news June 24, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 34 Length: 385 words Byline: Silvia Marchetti Body   They used to come and go as they pleased, like any ordinary Europeans, but now they have to limit their stays in Italy. This UK couple is now battling to prevent post-Brexit travel rules from spoiling their dream of splitting their time between Essex and a picturesque Sicilian village just south of Palermo. The number Britons in any EU within a 180 Gaetano and Tracy Montalbano, a couple in their fifties from Church Langley in Harlow, own a cosy dwelling in tiny Cianciana, where Mr Montalbano's ancestors hailed from. The pair voted Remain - but are now beholden to a rule forbidding Britons to stay in any European Union country for more than 90 out of 180 days. They bought their house three years ago for Euro 34,000 (£29,172) just before the Covid-19 pandemic. Since then, they have struggled with rules that force them to plan shorter trips and keep track of how many days they spend in Italy. Mr Montalbano, who works in food sales in the UK and likes to be called "Tony", has dual citizenship, but his wife and four children do not. Mrs Montalbano has applied for her Italian passport, but was told at the UK consulate that she is likely to have to wait up to four years and might have to spend £4,000, according to her husband, who paid just £85 to renew his. maximum of days can stay country period of days "An Italian passport, like most European passports, is so much harder to get now than before Brexit, even for spouses," Mr Montalbano told i. "Many Brits who have the possibility to claim one through ancestry or ties are doing so and applications to the Italian consulate in the UK are mounting, increasing red tape, making procedures much longer. "After Brexit I had to re-apply for my Italian passport, which had expired, and that took weeks. My granddad was from Cianciana but until the UK left the European Union, I never felt the need to have or use it. We'd come to Cianciana whenever we wanted, and stayed for how long we felt like." Mrs Montalbano, a flight attendant, wishes she had applied for her Italian passport before Brexit. "I'm really frustrated. I'm now restricted to how long I can stay." But she has no regrets over having bought the house after the vote. "I have always felt at home in Sicily." 90 The maximum number of days Britons can stay in any EU country within a period of 180 days Load-Date: June 23, 2023  End of Document
