   Brexit without end: UK 'associate member' of an enlarged EU by 2030? CE Noticias Financieras English September 23, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1725 words Body    On his recent international tour, the purpose of which was none other than to present himself to the world as 'a prime minister in waiting', British Labour opposition leader Keir Starmer has stressed that he does not want the UK to opt out of EU rules. "Obviously, the more values we share, the more of a future together we will have. There will be less conflict and, in fact, we will have more different ways of solving problems," he told a conference in Montreal. "Actually, we don't want to diverge, we don't want to lower standards, we don't want to break environmental, labor or food standards," he qualified.  The comments, which took up to six days to surface in the British press, surprised diplomats in Brussels, classifying them as "significant." For his part, in London, Charles Grant, director of the respected think tank 'Center for European Reform', stressed that the speech went "beyond" the cautious tone he had shown to date.  The possibility of the UK 'returning' to the EU is a question that was raised from the very moment the Brexit victory was announced in June 2016. It has been talked about ad nauseam actively and passively. But, for the first time since the historic divorce, three key factors now coincide that highly increase the likelihood of rapprochement.  In Brussels, the Franco-German axis has put forward a proposal for enlargement of the bloc with four different levels of 'integration' (a key word in Westminster). In London, it is taken for granted that Starmer will become the new Prime Minister next year, leading a non-eurosceptic Executive. And shortly, both sides have to renew the 'Trade and Cooperation Agreement' sealed on December 24, 2020. Is it possible for the UK to return to the club with the status of "associate member"?  This is the term used to refer to the third level of integration in an eventual enlargement of a four-speed EU raised in the report made by the twelve experts convened by the French and German governments. The objective is to establish a roadmap that also aims to increase the bloc's capacity for action and strengthen the rule of law and democratic legitimacy. Technically, this is not the official position of the Franco-German axis, but it is considered the unofficial one.   The report has had more coverage in the British media than in the rest of Europe. This is understandable, on the other hand, given the expectation that exists in view of the new community link that the expected new Labour government wants to establish. Starmer stresses that there will be no return to the single market or the customs union. However, he assures that he wants to improve the 'Trade and Cooperation Agreement' negotiated by Boris Johnson in 2020, whose article 776 establishes a review every five years.  The fact that the report of the Franco-German axis was published last Tuesday, precisely on the day that Starmer met Emmanuel Macron in Paris as part of his European tour, has led Eurosceptic circles to accuse the Labour leader of wanting to "reverse Brexit".  Not that in Brussels there is an obsession with wanting the UK back. The priorities now for the EU club are elsewhere, especially as it faces one of its most serious challenges in recent years with the mass arrival of migrants on the Italian island of Lampedusa, which has exposed the deep divisions within the EU.  But the invasion of Ukraine has marked a before and after. Enlargement - due to be completed in 2030 - really has Ukraine and the Western Balkans in mind to prevent them, one way or another, from ending up under Russian control.  In any case, European diplomatic sources claim that the idea of a four-speed EU has also been designed with a future Labour prime minister in the UK, the world's sixth largest economy, in mind. "It is carefully balanced politically to be a potential possibility for London without the need to rejoin the EU or hold a referendum," a diplomat told The Times on condition of anonymity. All in all, it seems difficult that Brussels will accept from London any model that is not previously agreed by the two majority parties in Westminster.  No one wants a repeat of the chaos  The first level of integration proposed by the Franco-German axis would have the countries committed to deeper union (probably France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the Netherlands) go ahead with further integration of the economy, defense, energy and transport. A second tier would include countries such as Ireland, Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Poland, Portugal, Romania or Sweden to continue their current relations.  The third tier - 'associate membership' - could include countries currently outside the EU, but with close financial ties, including Norway and Switzerland. It could also include aspiring members such as Ukraine, countries whose accession has proved problematic such as Albania and Turkey, and existing member countries such as Hungary, which have a history of conflict with the EU.  Membership fees would be lower than contributions from full members, but would result in "lower benefits," such as no access to the EU's common agricultural fund. If the UK were to eventually enter at this level, it would be able to speak in the European Commission and Parliament, but would have no MEPs and no voting rights. Also, to have a "stake" in the single market it would have to abide by the European Court of Justice, something that causes hives among Conservatives.  Finally, the fourth tier would probably be composed of countries that want "no integration at all, but a focus on geopolitical convergence structured around bilateral agreements with the EU." In short, the current 'European Political Community', the 40-plus nation conversation forum created by France, to which the UK already belongs. What's more, at the next summit in the spring of 2024, London will host it.  Starmer insists there is no reason to rejoin the EU. Prominent members of his team, such as Jonathan Reynolds, spokesman for Trade and Business, have ruled out the possibility of "associate membership." However, what politicians say in public is one thing; what they say in private is another. And it is one thing what they say in the run-up to the campaign and another what they do when they come to power.  A clear majority of Labour members - including leading figures within Starmer's so-called 'shadow government' - are in favor of exactly the kind of 'associate membership' offered by the Franco-German plan. They know they cannot say so openly because there is no desire to reopen the Brexit pandora's box and risk a repeat of their 2019 election defeat. But privately they believe that the status quo is unsustainable in the long term and that, at the very least, the UK needs a closer Norway-style relationship with what is its largest trading partner.  The general election scheduled for next year means that those voices will be silent, for the time being. Most Labour voters advocated staying in the EU. But the so-called 'Red Wall' in key northern English districts were seduced by Boris Johnson's Eurosceptic discourse and their vote ended up giving a majority to the Conservatives in the last election.  Labour cannot now risk making a false step. However, if they achieve a large majority, it will increase the pressure on Starmer to reconsider the position of the party, which, although still cautious, is gradually revealing its objectives.  Among others, it wants to regain some freedom of movement for young people; new agreements on veterinary control regulations; mutual recognition of conformity assessment of certain products or professional qualifications; greater flexibility in allowing short-term job postings; new partnerships with EU-driven programs; equivalence agreements in financial services and even a new security pact.  Polls reveal that 55% of all British voters today would advocate staying in the EU club, compared to a meager 31% who would continue to support leaving.  Prime Minister Rishi Sunak himself, to the fury of the most Eurosceptic sector of his ranks, has taken steps during his term of office to improve relations with the bloc. Just this month he announced that from next year the UK will rejoin the EU's Horizon science program, precisely as an "associate member". It is also preparing to join a satellite observation scheme called Copernicus, but has decided to stay out of a third party, the EU's Euratom nuclear program.  The principle of Horizon's "associate membership" was picked up in the 'Trade and Cooperation Agreement' negotiated by Boris Johnson to avoid a hard Brexit. But the issue was stalled by the controversy over the Northern Ireland protocol for new customs controls, which was finally resolved earlier this year.  The problem raised by analysts, however, is that an eventual Labour government will find it difficult to find a receptive audience in European capitals for such a renegotiation unless it is willing to offer significant concessions. Joël Reland, a research fellow at the think tank 'UK in Changing Europe' warns that"the EU is only interested in a very limited technical exercise looking at how the TCA [trade and cooperation agreement]is being implemented ." "If the UK wants to change, that will have to offer quite strong incentives," he qualifies.  The respected think tank puts forward three avenues that could be opened up in the future review of the agreement sealed in London and Brussels in December 2020. First, a minimalist model, which would limit itself to examining whether the pact and its procedures are working properly. Second, a moderate model that would aim to exploit the potential of the agreement. And finally, a maximalist model that would expand the scope for collaboration between the EU and the UK.  On his recent international tour, the purpose of which was none other than to present himself to the world as 'a prime minister in waiting', British Labour opposition leader Keir Starmer has stressed that he does not want the UK to opt out of EU rules. "Obviously, the more values we share, the more of a future together we will have. There will be less conflict and, in fact, we will have more different ways of solving problems," he told a conference in Montreal. "Actually, we don't want to diverge, we don't want to lower standards, we don't want to break environmental, labor or food standards," he qualified.  Load-Date: September 24, 2023  End of Document
