   Brexit fallout threatens to cut tourism link between Wicklow and Wales Wicklow People (Ireland) July 17, 2023  Copyright 2023 INM plc All Rights Reserved  Length: 408 words Body   A tourism project linking Wicklow and Wales entitled 'Celtic Routes' is in danger of collapsing due to the impacts of Brexit. Celtic Routes, a project designed to foster links and promote travel between counties in the southeast and Wales, has led to a series of successful tourism initiatives. However, Brexit has left its funding under threat, and the project will close unless new funds are found. Established in 2019 to link Wicklow, Wexford, Waterford and the Welsh regions of Carmarthenshire, Pembrokeshire and Ceredigion, approximately €4m has been spent on the project to date, with research showing that more than 300 million people globally have engaged with Celtic Routes online or through other forms of media in the past four years. Michael Nicholson, Director of Services at Wicklow County Council, which is a partner in the project, said that tourism in the region has benefited greatly from the scheme. "Between Brexit and the pandemic, it may be a little while before we see quantifiable results, but just having 300 million people view our area is extraordinary," Mr Nicholson said. "None of our partners could have achieved that result on their own. We as a partnership have many ideas for continued alliances, but all that is now in jeopardy." Initial funding of about €2m was provided for the project through an EU scheme aimed at enhancing cross-border cooperation between states, while further funding was provided by the Welsh government. The UK leaving the EU means these funding streams are no longer available. Celtic Routes project officer Oonagh Messette said the initiative will have to close next month if further funding is not found, so work can be done on winding the scheme down before the end of the year. She believes the project should be saved because the establishment of a replacement scheme would be expensive to set up. "We are already successful. We already have a presence and have put a lot of work into making ourselves known. Any new initiative starting out from scratch would have to go through all of that again," she said. "As a direct result of Brexit, there will be no continuation of the Ireland Wales Co-operation Fund. "While there may be considerable willingness on the part of all stakeholders, without the funding to administer activities, much will be lost. Our partnership, our networks, our collaboration and our immense marketing and promotion power essentially comes to a close at the end of August." Load-Date: July 17, 2023  End of Document
