   Brexit set the inflation monster free to stalk the UK Irish Independent June 23, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 698 words Byline: Seán O'Grady Body   W E'VE all heard a good deal of unwelcome news about mortgage rates in the UK in recent days, but the pain is going to get much worse before it gets better. To use a technical economic term, the latest inflation number is a stinker. So, far from rapidly tumbling towards the government's target of 5pc to 6pc, inflation is stuck at 8.7pc a year. Prices are still rising fast, with food inflation approaching 20pc - the kind of price rises people under the age of about 60 cannot remember first-hand. It's unnerving for those who have never seen this before; but more terrifying for those of us who did. The lesson from history is that to get inflation under control is always more painful and takes longer than anyone expects. It's a monster that feeds on itself, shreds savings and distorts the economy, as well as making the country poorer. We can blame the Bank of England, post-pandemic disruptions, Putin's war in Ukraine or Rishi Sunak. All have played their part in creating the predicament in which we find ourselves. Unfashionable as it may be to say in the UK, Brexit is also a malign factor, and Britain's unique misfortune. For we now see clearly that inflation is higher in the UK than in other comparable economies and has been for some time. Catherine Mann, who sits on the Bank of England's monetary policy committee, calculates that Brexit has meant prices are around 4pc higher than they would otherwise be thanks to the cumulative effects of the 2016 EU referendum decision, when set against comparable economies, not least because "no other country chose to unilaterally impose trade barriers on its closest trading partners." Disrupting supply chains in and out of the EU added bureaucracy, delays and costs, which stands to reason. Brexit also affected the easy dynamic flow of needed skills and types of workers under the old freedom of movement regime, substituting a clunky, arbitrary and politicised points-based system for the agile free-market system. More people are retiring early and more are suffering long-term illness because of the lingering effects of Covid. The effect of all that is to create a labour shortage and to push wages up, and these have been passed on. In some forms they've also squeezed profits. The economy cannot grow without people to work in it. The attempt to maintain living standards and wages in the face of a reduction in the capacity of the economy to supply goods and services - for lack of workers - made inflation inevitable. Using interest rates and higher taxes to hammer it down aren't the best weapons in such circumstances; but, barring a much higher level of immigration, they are the only tools the author- ities have at their disposal. The most depressing of the inflation readings is what they call "core inflation". This strips out the more volatile elements, including food and energy prices, which should suggest it will be more encouraging than the headline rate; but, right now, it is actually going in the wrong direction. It's really an indicator of how much of our inflation problem is "home-grown", which mostly boils down to wages costs and that labour shortage, worsened by Brexit. At 7.1pc it is unsustainably high and is accelerating. Inflationary expectations are being built into wage bargaining - as we see with the current wave of strikes - and, sad to say, even at this point shops and suppliers are finding it too easy to pass cost increases through to prices. The dreaded wage/price spiral is back. To make matters worse, Sunak has unnecessarily added a second, informal political inflation target, which may have the impact of subconsciously making the Bank of England panic and ramp rates up performatively, risking a housing crash and wider slump. If memory serves, it will take much higher rates than are even being priced in now to get inflation out of the system, because their impact is now so concentrated on such a relatively small slice of the population. The borrowers in London and a few other pockets of affluence with stratospheric property values are going to bear a disproportionate share of the burden of fighting inflation. For them, the pain may prove unbearable. (©Independent News Service) Load-Date: June 23, 2023  End of Document
