   Britain is slowly but surely rebuilding ties with Europe i-news June 1, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 700 words Byline: Ian Dunt Body   On the face of it, it's just another head-in-hands endorsement of Brexit by the leader of the Opposition. Writing in the Daily Express, Keir Starmer made the usual deadening promises: no return to the EU. No return to the single market. No return to the customs union. But read a little further and things become more interesting. In truth, Labour's Brexit position is far more nuanced, and much more radical, than it first appears. It has been carefully couched in the language of Brexit defence, but the proposals themselves promise a return to a much closer relationship with the Continent. It is the start of a journey back to Europe. "There is no point pretending everything is working fine," Starmer wrote. "The paper-thin Tory deal has stifled Britain's potential." How would he fix it? By "fixing the Trade and Cooperation Agreement" and reducing "checks and paperwork at the border". How will this be done? He outlined that in a "five-point plan" last year. There would be "a new veterinary agreement" between the UK and EU which would then be extended "to cover all the UK, benefiting exporters". This would include "mutual recognition of conformity assessments across specified sectors" - where one partner accepts the tests for goods conducted by the other without them needing to be checked twice. And it would include dynamic alignment on EU standards. Dynamic alignment is the form of Brexit the Johnson administration opposed at the turn of the decade. It entails a very close relationship with the EU. It means that parties to a trade agreement maintain equivalent regulatory standards to each other. We would be conjoining ourselves with Europe once more. Look closer still. Starmer might have ruled out a return to freedom of movement, but he has spoken about "new flexible labour mobility arrangements for short-term work trips and for musicians and artists". It is not so hard to envisage him accepting the recommendations of the Lords European Affairs Committee last month, proposing passport-free travel for school trips and a "reciprocal youth mobility partnership". And suddenly, you have something which is basically freedom of movement for the young. This is what the Labour position amounts to, when you focus on the proposals themselves. It does not involve a return to the EU, single market or customs union. But it does involve the closest relationship with Europe outside of those institutions. It is, in short, a rationalisation of the relationship, a reset after the dreadful years since 2016. Polling shows a soaring sense of regret for leaving the EU. Recent MRP polling - the most sophisticated model available - by Focaldata for internationalism campaigners Best for Britain found 63 per cent of people believe Brexit has created more problems than it has solved, compared to just 21 per cent who believe it has solved more than it has created. Fifty-three per cent of voters want a closer relationship with the EU, against just 14 per cent who want more distance. Even in Boston and Skegness, which had a 74.9 per cent Leave vote in 2016, 40 per cent now want to be closer to the EU - 19 per cent want to be more distant. I wrote in 2020 that getting back into the EU was a decade-long project. The first step was to stop discussing rejoining and instead turn the conversation to how Brexit was going. That has now been well established. The second was for Labour to adopt a posture which could point out that failure while ruling out entering the EU. That has also been well established. If it returned to power, it would secure a closer relationship with the EU. I suggested that any proposal to return to the EU - whether it's full-fat membership or a return to the single market or customs union - would have to wait until Labour's second term, around 2030. That now feels genuinely realistic. There is, of course, a very great deal that can go wrong between now and then. But things are pointing in a more promising direction. If you put aside the tedious and unconvincing hardline rhetoric, a clear picture emerges. Brexit is collapsing. And Britain is, slowly but surely, drifting back to Europe. Put aside the rhetoric and a clear picture emerges: Brexit is collapsing Load-Date: May 31, 2023  End of Document
