   Britain is now in serious danger of losing Brexit; Labour has shown its hand but too many Tories have also given in to the dismal Theresa May view of the EU The Daily Telegraph (London) September 15, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 15 Length: 853 words Byline: DAVID FROST Body   The country may feel in a bit of a mess at the moment, but things can always get worse. Keir Starmer and the Labour Party have given us a glimpse this week of what a Labour-run Britain would be like. On Monday, Angela Rayner committed the party to repealing the recent - though it has to be said half-hearted - legal constraints on strikes brought in by this Government. On Wednesday, it showed it was in hock to environmental pressure groups and quangos by voting down the Government's belated plans to change the ridiculously risk-averse and wholly undemocratic ruling by Natural England blocking the building of nearly 150,000 houses - a ruling which implements the judgment of the court of an organisation we have since left. And now we have the Starmer plan for stopping the boats: to promise the EU that, in return for the bloc taking back illegal arrivals here, we would take in a larger number of illegal arrivals there. Why he thinks such an unequal bargain would be in our interests, or why our immigration numbers should depend on the ability of Italy, Spain and Greece to control their own borders - that's anyone's guess. It's all part of a pattern. Labour claims to want economic growth but will vote against any specic e ort to make it happen. It claims to like business in theory, but not if it infringes trade union rights. It wants to build houses but not if that upsets its perfectionist, fantasy-world view of the environment. And, above all, Labour wants to take us back closer to the EU. If the party can't get us back in, it would, if elected, agree unequal deals to make us an EU rule-taker in return for the nebulous benefits of greater co-operation. It'll begin with a food standards agreement; then align elsewhere; then bring us closer to the single market and customs union again. Each step Labour will present as sensible and pragmatic, opposed only by fanatics - but gradually we will be back in the EU tractor beam. Facilis descensus Averno. But it's not just Labour and the Lib Dems who want this. This week in Westminster, the ghastly clanking wraith of the Theresa May government has been on view once again as some leading gures promote their memoirs. Rory Stewart, a decent man who for some reason feels no shame in sharing a podcast with the boorish Alastair Campbell, has actually welcomed the Starmer asylum plan. And Theresa May herself has been telling us her awful Brexit deal would have been better for the country than the one that nally took us out. Seriously? The deal that would have locked us in the EU customs union and goods single market for ever, with no say over any of its laws, and yet still put a regulatory and customs border down the Irish Sea? The commitment to negotiate a highly integrated "deep and special partnership" in future on EU terms? Thank goodness Boris and I were able to remove the worst from this wretched ill-starred agreement. But the country must unfortunately still live with the legacy of the May government: not only those bungled EU talks, but also the Modern Slavery Act that helped create the small boats problem and must now be unpicked, and the casual, thoughtless, virtuesignalling, economy-crushing commitment to net zero. No, the less we hear of the May era the better. You can only think her deal would have been better for Britain if your vision of the EU relationship is one of close alignment, widespread imposition of EU law, and rule-taking by this country. That wasn't what the Johnson government wanted and, fortunately for us all, it isn't what we delivered. But it is signicant that May felt able to surface this week and say it. All too many people in all the parties think Britain's destiny is to retrace our steps and get closer again to the EU. For many, our decision to rejoin Horizon (the EU's science programme) seems to show that - even though we agreed membership back in 2020 and it's the EU that has blocked it. These people make too much of the running, and the defence of our free and democratic Brexit is left to a few people on social media. When the Oce for National Statistics told us the other week that the British economy had grown faster than hitherto thought, we got one tweet from the Chancellor. When was the last time you heard any leading Government gure defending the 2020 Brexit deal? Ministers are ready to defend the unhappy so-called Windsor Framework, but rarely speak up for the earlier deal which gave us back our democracy, enables new trade agreements, allows our new agricultural support arrangements, gives us back control over immigration (even if we are exercising it poorly), enables licensing of genetically modied organisms, reforms of nancial services, changes in government procurement rules, and much much more. The Brexit we have is forever associated with this party and this Government. We won an election with a mandate for it, and then delivered it, something all too rare nowadays. If voters start to doubt it, we will not escape punishment. So we must defend it. We must spell out the benefits. Or we will lose it. DAVID FROST on Twitter @DavidGHFrost; at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion Load-Date: September 15, 2023  End of Document
