   Britons duped by the myth of a golden age; Get in touch - tell us what you think Email: ecletters@walesonline.co.uk Twitter: @WalesOnline Facebook: www.facebook.com/WalesOnline Post: Media Wales, 6 Park Street, Cardiff CF10 1XR South Wales Echo September 16, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: LETTERS; Pg. 22 Length: 366 words Body   The Brexit successfully many British believing ideology Chris IN DAVID Gorton's letter (South Wales Echo, September 13), he makes a number of wrong and puzzling claims about the EU. As a benefit of Brexit, he says we are now "friends" with smaller economies like Canada, Australia and New Zealand. But being "friends" with smaller economies thousands of miles away isn't going to help us much? Indeed the Farmers' Union have lambasted the Australian trade deal as a "one-sided" deal that granted Australian producers too much access to the UK market for too little in return. Also Mr Gorton says that our "independence" let us be the first with the Covid vaccine but this is also wrong. Being a member of the EU was irrelevant to how our pharmaceutical industry develops drugs (that is, apart from prior to Brexit when highly-skilled EU scientists could easily work in the UK and help in the development of vaccines. Unfortunately they now have to negotiate a bureaucratic nightmare to work here so most don't bother. Our loss). Mr Gorton looks forward to a trade deal with India, which is renowned for being one of the most corrupt countries in Asia. According to a Transparency International Asia survey, India has one of the highest incidences of bribery and use of personal connections to access key public services such as health and education with courts, police, revenue department, and hospitals apparently being the most corrupt bodies. Mr Gorton also believes the UK economy has not collapsed. I suggest he takes a walk round any town centre and open his eyes to the sad sight of boarded-up/empty shops and the many broken, homeless people begging for money. Perhaps then he'll recognise all is not well and the Brexit catastrophe has contributed so much to this downfall of the UK. The sad truth is the Brexit campaign successfully groomed many British people into believing a false ideology, what Salman Rushdie calls a "golden age myth". campaign groomed people into a false Chris Lewis Cathays, Cardiff Gorton's letter Echo, he  to this downfall The sad campaign  The Brexit campaign successfully groomed many British people into believing a false ideology Chris Lewis  and But with  learned Load-Date: September 16, 2023  End of Document
