   Business group urges closer regulatory alignment with EU; Post-Brexit trade Financial Times (London, England) June 1, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 309 words Byline: PETER FOSTER; GEORGE PARKER Body   A future British government should adopt a "general policy" of aligning with EU regulations to improve post-Brexit trade, an independent crossparty business group said yesterday. The recommendation to align with EU standards across swaths of manufacturing and general goods trade was among 114 proposals made in a report published by the UK Trade and Business Commission, which is co-chaired by Hilary Benn, a Labour MP and former cabinet minister. The ideas, which include establishing a new Board of Trade to serve as an independent watchdog for UK trade policy, follow a pledge by Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer to build a "closer relationship" with Brussels if the party wins the next general election. Benn, who chaired the House of Commons Brexit committee until it was disbanded by Boris Johnson's government in January 2021, said the report provided "a menu of things that could be done to help our firms to grow and prosper". He added: "It's now time to listen to business about what needs to be done to fix the problems that we can all clearly see." Starmer has vowed to "fix Brexit" after the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) negotiated by Johnson created a host of barriers with Britain's largest trading partner. But Labour has provided scant details about how it would reduce Brexit border frictions while keeping a promise not to rejoin the EU single market or enter a customs union with the bloc. Based on extensive oral hearings and written evidence from more than 200 businesses and trade groups, the commission's report set out an array of policy options ahead of the next election, to be held by January 2025, and the fiveyearly review of the TCA, which will start the same year. It acknowledged that some of its proposals would require the co-operation of the EU. The government did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Load-Date: May 31, 2023  End of Document
