   Business 'breathes sigh of relief ' after post-Brexit goods safety mark ditched; Climbdown over rival to EU scheme Indefinite halt on 2025 start Industry's lobbying pays off Financial Times (London, England) August 2, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1 Length: 550 words Byline: PETER FOSTER; GEORGE PARKER Body   The plan for a post-Brexit rival to the EU's "CE" product-quality mark has been ditched after business leaders warned ministers that it was tying manufacturers in red tape. The "indefinite" postponement of a copycat "UKCA" safety mark for manufactured goods was welcomed by industry after more than two years of lobbying to abandon the scheme. The government said that businesses selling electronic, industrial and consumer products into Britain would now be free to use either the UKCA or the CE marks to demonstrate that their goods conformed to industrial standards. Kevin Hollinrake, business minister, said the decision was taken to reduce "red tape" and "prevent a cliff-edge moment" with the planned introduction of UKCA from the start of 2025. But in a sign of the uncertainty still affecting post-Brexit rules, two sectors - construction products and medical devices - were not covered by the announcement and will still have to use the UK quality-assurance system. Ministers had portrayed the British safety mark as a way in which the country could "take back control of our product regulations" in the wake of Brexit, but it was always rejected by industry as a costly distraction. Many companies have spent large sums of money preparing for the new system. The British Chambers of Commerce said that business would "breathe a sigh of relief" at the move and urged the government to go further to reduce regulatory gaps with the EU. The decision is the latest signal that Rishi Sunak's government has accepted the limitations of post-Brexit divergence. Kemi Badenoch, business secretary, largely abandoned the UKCA mark as part of her drive to simplify the post-Brexit business landscape. "Kemi listened to business and basically said that this had gone on long enough and we had to sort it out," said one ally. By contrast, many Brexiters had insisted that divergence from EU laws and standards would lead to a productivity boost in the economy. David Henig, a former official at the Department for International Trade now at the European Centre for International Political Economy think-tank, said that the decision on the UKCA mark reflected the difficulty in establishing a rival regulatory system. "For smaller markets as the UK is now, compared to the regulatory superpower of the EU, these are the difficult choices that have to be made," he added. Business groups have repeatedly warned that the copycat qualityassurance mark was creating unnecessary burdens for industry by creating dual EU and UK certification regimes. The introduction of the mark had been delayed on three occasions since the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement came into force in January 2021, angering businesses that had invested time and money in preparing for the scheme. Stephen Phipson, chief executive of Make UK, the manufacturers' lobby group, welcomed the indefinite postponement as "a pragmatic and common sense decision". Sam Lowe, trade expert at consultancy Flint Global, said that the government had bowed to the inevitable with its decision. "However, given this was always the likely outcome, it is understandable that some companies that have sunk money into adaptation will be slightly aggrieved," he said. 'Companies that have sunk money into adaptation will be slightly aggrieved' Sam Lowe, trade expert Load-Date: October 27, 2023  End of Document
