   Cameron's return: new chancellor of the United Kingdom CE Noticias Financieras English November 14, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 945 words Body   LONDON With an election on the horizon and polls that bode ill, the British government decided to take action by announcing yesterday the unexpected return to politics of former Prime Minister David Cameron as the new Chancellor, replacing James Cleverly, who moved to the Home Office, following the sacking of the controversial Suella Braverman. This three-way move was triggered by Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's decision to sack Braverman, following her criticism of the police and after she became embroiled in several controversies. The executive reshuffle would seek to give a boost to the ruling Conservative Party ahead of next year's legislative elections, several British media reported, when polls give Labour as the winner. "Today, @RishiSunak is strengthening his government team to implement long-term decisions for a better future," said the Conservative formation on the social network X (formerly Twitter). Cameron, 57, had left power in 2016, following the victory of Brexit in the referendum on the UK's exit from the European Union (EU), which the then Conservative leader opposed, and was left with no choice but to resign. The then prime minister had lost his bet by pushing for a high-stakes referendum on an issue that fragmented the Conservative Party. SEVEN YEARS AWAY In order to get into government, Cameron, who was not an MP, was appointed to the British Parliament's House of Lords (upper) chamber, according to Downing Street. Despite his removal from politics these past seven years, Cameron said he hoped that his "experience" of more than a decade at the head of the Conservative party and six years at the head of the government (2010-2016), will serve him to "help" Sunak to face international "challenges", citing the war in Ukraine and the crisis in the Middle East, according to a message published on X. Cameron represents a more moderate wing within the party as opposed to the very conservative Suella Braverman. "Sunak's authority had taken a big hit after the now former minister's statements. Some speculate that Braverman was seeking an exit from the cabinet to position herself as Sunak's internal rival and as a future candidate to lead the party in case the government loses the general elections in a year's time," explained Ezequiel González Ocantos, Argentine professor of Political Science at Oxford University. "With his exit, Sunak seeks to reestablish his authority and appeal to the moderate sectors that have abandoned the party. This can also be seen with the apparent appointment of Cameron," added González Ocantos. The situation of Braverman, 43, had reached a critical point at the end of last week when several fronts called for her dismissal, after the minister criticized, in a column in The Times, the London police, after the authorization of the pro-Palestinian march that took place on Saturday. The article had not received the green light from Downing Street, contrary to the rules to be followed, with Braverman's comments undermining the operational independence of the police. AVE PHOENIX The truth is that Cameron, like a phoenix, rose from the ashes and returned to politics as the new head of British diplomacy, after his career in the Conservative Party was almost over. Michael Heseltine, a figure of great reputation among the Conservatives and who was part of the governments of Margaret Thatcher and John Major, of whom he was deputy prime minister, praised Cameron's figure after learning of his appointment. "David Cameron has a great image and a great reputation," he said, adding that the move has "ended" the recent "right-wing sacking" in the party. "This is the biggest change Sunak could make. Because it is the clearest sign that the rightward lurch and the anti-European movement that we have seen has been quelled," he said. Although that good reputation Heseltine speaks of was partly tarnished with accusations of contacting ministers in 2021 on behalf of financial firm Greensill Capital. A parliamentary report cleared him of any wrongdoing, but did say it had been inappropriate for him to lobby on behalf of Greensill, with which he had a "very significant personal financial interest." Educated at the prestigious Eton College, near Windsor Palace, and Oxford University, Cameron took the reins of the Conservative Party at a very young age, becoming leader of the party in 2005, at the age of 39. As the new Foreign Secretary, Cameron faces two difficult issues such as the Ukraine War and the Hamas-Israel conflict. In his memoirs in 2019, Cameron launched a fierce attack on his former rival and then prime minister, Boris Johnson, accusing him of supporting Brexit only to boost his own career. The Brexit was his biggest political setback, although on a personal level he experienced a family tragedy. The eldest of his four children, Ivan, was born with Ohtahara syndrome, a rare combination of cerebral palsy and severe epilepsy, dying in 2009, at the age of six. That referendum defeat came after a series of successes for Cameron, who managed to guide his party to victory in the 2015 election, winning an absolute majority. He also won another referendum, on Scottish independence, in 2014. That successful spiral was halted by the referendum that led to Brexit, on June 23, 2016. Before that defeat, he had announced that he would not stand for election in 2020, wanting to devote more time to his wife and three children. A chancellor's post and a struggling Conservative party, with the polls clearly against Labour in the run-up to next year's elections, have put an end to his sabbatical. Cameron opposed the British exit from the European Union and resigned after the Brexit victory. Load-Date: November 15, 2023  End of Document
