   Candidate's focus is on campaigning after Grady comments Evening Times (Glasgow) September 11, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Newsquest Media Group All Rights Reserved  Section: Pg. 2 Length: 544 words Byline: D CMS  Body   THE SNP's candidate in a crucial by-election has insisted her main focus is on campaigning after she appeared to welcome an MP who was accused of sexual harassment to canvass for her. Katy Loudon, the SNP's candidate in the Rutherglen and Hamilton West by-election on October 5, told The Scotsman on Saturday that she would "welcome" Patrick Grady to the constituency to campaign for her. Last month, Scottish Labour called for Mr Grady to be banned from the constituency. Mr Grady apologised in Parliament after being found to have acted inappropriately towards a party staffer. He had the SNP whip restored in December following a six-month suspension. Launching the campaign in Rutherglen on Saturday, Ms Loudon said her focus was "very much" on campaigning after she was asked if Mr Grady's presence would be more of a hindrance than a help. She said: "The vast majority of our days at the moment are spent out chapping doors and speaking to the people of Rutherglen and Hamilton West and that's the priority. "That's where my focus is just now and that's where it's going to remain, listening to people's priorities and their concerns." But in The Scotsman on Saturday, she said she would welcome any activist who wanted to help. She told the newspaper: "I've never been involved in any of  the party's disciplinary proceedings or sat on any of those committees. "The party has taken action, the Westminster committee has taken action. If Patrick (Grady) comes along here to campaign as an activist then he would be doing so in that capacity." Ms Loudon said the party was "very confident" about its chances of winning the by-election, adding: "I wouldn't be standing in this by-election if I didn't think I was the best candidate to represent the area. "Labour are running around just now as if they've won this, they've practically got the bunting and the balloons out already. "There's a lot of hard work to be done, but we're taking nothing for granted." The party also said South Lanarkshire's businesses "deserve better than the pro-Brexit Westminster parties". The statement comes ahead of a campaign visit by cabinet secretary Neil Gray MSP and business ambassador Ian Blackford MP. Mr Gray and Mr Blackford will join Ms Loudon in Burnside to speak to small local businesses about the issues they face. Since Brexit, South Lanarkshire has lost a staggering £146 million on EU imports and exports, as well as almost £10m in direct EU funding. Analysis from Bloomberg Economics also found that Brexit has cost the UK £100 billion a year in lost output, and caused a third of the UK's food price inflation. Speaking ahead of the visit, Mr Blackford said: "Westminster has trashed the UK economy and inflicted long-term damage on businesses across Scotland, South Lanarkshire and Rutherglen and Hamilton West.  "They deserve better.  "Leaving the EU has contributed to food inflation soaring and left businesses facing uncertainty and expensive red tape - but Keir Starmer and Anas Sarwar are happy to ignore reality as the Labour Party continues to back Brexit. "A vote for the SNP's Katy Loudon in the upcoming by-election is a vote for a strong voice at Westminster, standing against Brexit and Westminster policies that are damaging to our local businesses and community."   Load-Date: September 11, 2023  End of Document
