   Cosying up to the EU will get Labour nowhere; Brussels is sticking by the Brexit deal whatever Lammy or Starmer may wish, though better relations are a necessity The Times (London) June 15, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 25 Length: 947 words Byline: Iain Martin Body   It is not hard to work out where Labour's new foreign secretary will pay his first visit after the general election. If the party wins, he will head straight to the Eurostar to catch a train to Brussels. David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary who expects to get the job in government ? let's see ? pointed the way this week when he said that rebuilding the relationship with the EU will be Labour's "No 1 priority" in foreign policy. I applaud the sentiment. As a moderate Brexiteer, I wrote here in the spring about the need for Britain to take a constructive approach to relations with Brussels. Though I fear it won't get us very far. Lammy and Labour are being www.naive.No doubt Labour would be greeted warmly at the European Commission. After a grip-and-grin photocall, and much briefing that relations can advance in a new spirit of common feeling now the nasty Tories have gone, things will move to a meeting room and the door will close. Lammy and the new prime minister, Sir Keir Starmer, will be offered a croissant each. They will ask their hosts for a better Brexit deal. After a few minutes, heads on the EU side of the table will www.shake.No such better deal is available outside the EU, it will be said. The red lines remain what they were during the acrimonious Brexit talks. But would they like another croissant? This is awkward for Starmer, who vowed last month to renegotiate Britain's post-Brexit free-trade deal. He wants to get better terms from the TCA, the Trade and Co-operation Agreement, which governs relations on the economy, trade, fisheries, energy and legal co-operation. Although the TCA is a free-trade agreement, it keeps in place restrictions and onerous paperwork demanded by the EU to prevent Britain getting the benefits of the single market without adhering to EU rules, contributing to its bills and accepting the sovereignty of Brussels. The agreement is set to be reviewed in 2025-26, although the EU says not to expect much. The commission restated its position this week at the EU-UK Forum annual conference, an event in Brussels to rebuild relations after the fractious divorce. Maros Sefcovic, the commission's vice-president for interinstitutional relations, was friendly. He noted how much relations had improved. He was also firm: the deal is the deal. Barriers may even get higher, over time. A senior EU official said afterwards any renegotiation of the Brexit deal was "a very long shot". The EU is not going to rip up paperwork on food or wine consignments no matter how nice Labour is to the EU. For Starmer this was a setback, undermining his policy and raising questions about what he is prepared to offer the EU to change its mind. Might Labour promise to accept Brussels rules on goods, food and services unilaterally, in return for easier access for companies and the hope of a revised treaty? It is unclear. What the episode demonstrates again is not only how tricky this will be to manage for both major parties. Successful policy will require more time spent understanding our neighbours now we are not in the EU. Last week I was in Siena, one of a few Britons taking part in the Vision think tank event on the future of Europe. It featured academics, EU officials, think tankers and a few politicians, discussing all manner of policy areas. Contrary to the cartoonish slogans of Brexit hardliners, and Rejoiners on the other side, the picture in Europe is complex. Next year there are the European elections which may or may not alter the dynamics. The conservative parties could become the dominant bloc and might decide to be more sympathetic to compromise. Meanwhile, the balance of power in the EU shifts eastwards, towards a fast-growing Poland leading the rearmament of Europe against the Russian menace. On defence and security, the awkward truth for Europe is that Britain is needed. It is, with France, one of the continent's two main powers, and with the US it is a driving force in Nato, the organisation protecting Europe. This is more apparent after Ukraine. There are other factors that will shape relations. Will Ursula von der Leyen get a second term as president of the European Commission? Her relationship with Rishi Sunak is positive. A new commission president may take a different view. Many of my fellow Brexiteers will be appalled even by the mention of Von der Leyen's name, as though we can exist in isolation. Yet an intelligent neighbouring country cannot ignore the politics of the EU. Britain can no more do that than Scotland, if it left the UK, could ignore its neighbour, England. Where Lammy is correct is that the relationship requires painstaking attention. The Sunak government has started to do this, it says, after the Northern Ireland protocol deal. During Brexit, responsibility for EU relations was passed around Whitehall. Now, No 10 and the Foreign Office appear to be in charge and rethinking. The embassy in Brussels is starting to consider how improvements might be made. There is no magic denouement. The diplomatic work will be continual and frustrating, requiring pragmatism, taking mutual wins where possible, and looking for trade-offs, in particular in manufacturing sectors. The alternative is British policy being paralysed for decades by hardline Brexiteers who raise the false spectre of a plot to rejoin. Hardline Remainers, or rejoiners, dismiss any improvement in relations as not being a patch on what we had before. This is not a sensible basis on which to conduct national policy. Engaging with the EU seriously is going to be a geopolitical fact of life. The diplomatic work will be frustrating, requiring pragmatism On defence, the awkward truth is that Britain is needed Load-Date: June 15, 2023  End of Document
