   Covid not Brexit drove up inflation, says Bailey The Daily Telegraph (London) June 29, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 19 Length: 286 words Byline: Tim Wallace Body   COVID is to blame for the inflation crisis rather than Brexit, Andrew Bailey said in a veiled rebuke to Mark Carney, his predecessor as Governor of the Bank of England. Mr Bailey said the pandemic is the key problem, as workers who left the jobs market during Covid do not appear to have returned, leaving a sustained hole in the economy. Earlier this month Mr Carney said Brexit was an important factor behind Britain's stubbornly high inflation figure. The former governor said he had been vindicated after having predicted that Brexit would lead to higher prices and slower growth. Speaking yesterday at a central banking conference in Portugal, Mr Bailey said Britain's "very robust labour market", with low unemployment and a high number of job vacancies, was in part to blame for "sticky" inflation. "I don't think Brexit is a part of that labour market story," he said. "A lot more of it is to do with the response to Covid. One of the striking things about the UK is that the size of the labour force is smaller than it was at the outbreak of Covid. We are seeing some reversal of that now but we are not back to where we were pre-Covid." The Governor hinted that interest rates may need to rise further from the current level of 5pc, and potentially stay high for longer than financial markets anticipate, as officials battle to bring down inflation. Jerome Powell, chairman of the US Federal Reserve, echoed Mr Bailey's indication that interest rates need to stay high for a sustained period to pull down inflation. Meanwhile, Christine Lagarde, president of the European Central Bank, urged governments to rein in the heavy borrowing and spending of the Covid era, which has also been blamed for boosting inflation. Load-Date: June 29, 2023  End of Document
