   David Cameron reappears in British politics as Foreign Secretary CE Noticias Financieras English November 14, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1098 words Body   Former British Prime Minister David Cameron reappeared in local political life with a surprise nomination as Foreign Minister, a position in which he will replace James Claverly, sent by Prime Minister Rishi Sunak to occupy the Home Office after the dismissal of the controversial Suella Braverman.Cameron, who resigned from the Government in 2016, after the referendum on the exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union (EU), is known for his pro-European stances and criticized by many for having called for a plebiscite. His appointment could reopen Brexit divisions again. The former British leader stated that, despite having been out of frontline politics for years, he expects his previous experience as Conservative Party leader and prime minister to be useful. "Although I have been out of frontline politics for the last seven years, I hope that my experience, will help me to help the prime minister meet these vital challenges," he said after the appointment. The ex-premier added that while he may not have agreed with some "individual decisions" taken by Sunak, the prime minister is a "strong and capable" leader. He also said that the UK faces a "daunting set of international challenges," referring to conflicts such as those in Ukraine and the Middle East. Unlike his predecessor, Cameron is not an MP and will not appear before the House of Commons, but will be appointed by Sunak as a member of the House of Lords, which is not elected in the UK. For this the prime minister offered him a life peerage, which means that he can sit in the upper house for life. This allows her to hold office and avoid having to regularly face questions and questioning from MPs. Sunak fired Braverman amid several internal controversies, a decision that marks a turning point in the recent cabinet reshuffle ahead of elections in 2024. Known for her tough and often controversial stances, especially within the more right-wing conservative faction, the flamboyant former Interior Minister had created tensions with the government, where there were concerns that her interventions in the media could affect re-election plans. The straw that broke the camel's back was an article in a British newspaper, criticizing the Metropolitan Police (Met) over the organization of pro-Palestinian protests in central London. In a statement following her dismissal, she said that "it was the greatest privilege of her life to serve as Home Secretary. I will have more to say in due course." She also faced criticism for trivializing the refugee situation and for prioritizing immigration control over other issues. In addition, Braverman, who is the daughter of immigrants from Kenya and Mauritius, made controversial statements questioning the integration of immigrants and suggesting that they live "parallel lives." On social media, she criticized the distribution of tents to homeless people and sought to impose fines on the charities involved. Her statements were condemned by former police officers and politicians, accusing her of fomenting division. Sunak's reorganization also coincides with the pending Supreme Court decision on the plan to send refugees to Rwanda. In that sense, a favorable ruling could reinforce the Government's narrative of having an effective plan to handle immigration, while a ruling against could intensify calls for the UK to leave the European Convention on Human Rights, with Braverman possibly leading this stance from outside the Government. With a general election due next year, the composition of the Cabinet is crucial to the future of the Conservative Party and the country. This reshuffle, surprising to several quarters, raises questions about the direction of the Sunak Government and the ability of his team to meet the current political and social challenges. At the same time, Cameron's return and Braverman's departure generated mixed reactions among Conservative Party members. Some expressed support for Cameron, recognizing his experience and political skills, but others questioned the appropriateness of his return, especially given the controversies he left in his time at 10 Downing Street, with a track record that includes his austerity policies, his decisions regarding Brexit, his interest in strengthening relations with China, and allegations of undue influence during his involvement in the collapsed specialist financial group Greensill. Jacob Rees-Mogg, a former trade minister and current presenter on GB News, criticized Sunak's decision to remove Braverman, stating that "Suella understood what the British voter was thinking and was trying to do something about it." While Rees-Mogg acknowledged that Cameron "got it wrong on the Brexit issue, he stressed that he gave the British people the option to vote." Nevertheless, he described him as "a very intelligent and capable person." Labour says the turnover in the government team shows that Sunak's aim to deliver change is "laughable." So far, the only Labour member to comment on the ministerial overhaul is Pat McFadden, the party's national campaign coordinator, The Guardian noted. "A few weeks ago, Rishi Sunak said David Cameron was part of a failed status quo and now he will bring it back as his life raft. This demolishes the prime minister's ludicrous claim to offer change after 13 years of failed conservatism," he said. Scottish Independence Party (SNP) deputy leader at Westminster, Mhairi Black , said Scotland will be "appalled" and "shows how tired this Conservative government is." "People in Scotland will be appalled that the architect of thirteen years of Conservative austerity cuts and the disastrous Brexit referendum is back in government," she said. Black told Scottish media that Cameron's damaging Conservative policies slashed Scotland's budget, battered the economy , pushed millions into poverty and cut vital public services. "And his catastrophic error of judgment on Brexit is the UK's biggest foreign policy disaster since the Iraq war," he said. The Cabinet reshuffle also included the replacement of other ministers such as Environment and Transport, among others, while Jeremy Hunt will remain as Finance Minister. Meanwhile, according to a government spokesman. Cleverly for his part, upon assuming his new position as Home Secretary, pointed out the importance of immigration on his agenda. "I am absolutely committed to stopping the crossing of boats as we promised, but also to making sure that everyone in the UK feels safe and secure," he stressed. The post David Cameron reappears in British politics as Foreign Secretary appeared first on Diario San Rafael. Load-Date: November 15, 2023  End of Document
