   David Lammy can't be allowed to have his Brexit cake and eat it The Daily Telegraph (London) June 21, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 548 words Byline: ALAN SKED Body   In 1962 at Rambouillet, General de Gaulle informed Harold Macmillan that he would be vetoing Britain's bid to enter the EEC. Putting his arm around the prime minister's shoulder, he then quoted Edith Piaf: "Ne pleurez pas M'Lord." In 2016 and the years that followed, it was the Labour Party's shadow Brexit secretary, Sir Keir Starmer, who yearned to veto the government's actions - this time in its efforts to leave the European bloc. And today, it is clear that despite Labour's attempts to present itself as a pro-Brexit party, it still has an anti- Brexit bias. Just take the recent speech by the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, advocating "closer" relations with Europe, particularly on economic and security matters. He claimed that "reconnecting" Britain to the world "must start by reconnecting with our European neighbours". Indeed, on previous occasions Mr Lammy has promised a new EU-UK security pact, in order to rebuild our "tarnished" international reputation. Yet, aside from his inherent negativity, the main problem is that there is no clear understanding of what Lammy's policy would mean. Surely, closer relations would lead to Britain tying itself once again into European institutions - the very issue that caused millions to vote Leave seven years ago. Inevitably it would also lead to a loss of sovereignty, and perhaps a complete loss of control as some politicians in Brussels call for qualified majority voting on matters of foreign policy. And it would reduce our independent influence in Nato, as Brussels attempts to make it EU-focused. Nevertheless, while Lammy might understand these issues, he fails to confront them openly. It could even be said that he would like to have his cake and eat it, which is precisely the charge that Labour levelled at Boris Johnson during the Brexit negotiations, when, supposedly, he wanted the benefits of the EU without the responsibility of membership. And what about the immediate implications? It has already been reported, for instance, that Emmanuel Macron may block Ben Wallace's nomination as Nato secretary-general, insisting on an EU representative to fill the post - possibly the Danish prime minister Mette Frederiksen. Who would Lammy back? A firm, British supporter of Ukraine, or the candidate of Macron? Furthermore, would he be willing to cede his microphone to the EU's foreign policy spokesman? Perhaps it is that our potential next foreign secretary is an innocent abroad. Like Starmer, he simply wants to be liked in Brussels. But the trouble is that the Labour policy is so ambiguous as to allow a broad and dangerous range of interpretations. Is rejoining the EU the real aim? Who knows. Of course, there is always a place for ambiguity in foreign relations. When Lady Blessington, who had been the mistress of the exiled Louis Napoleon, later met an insecure Emperor Napoleon III in France, he asked her whether she intended to stay long in Paris. To which she gave the withering reply: "Yes, your Majesty. What about you?" Unfortunately, Lammy is unlikely to give the same quality of response to any of Europe's leaders. Alan Sked is emeritus professor of international history at LSE. His latest book is 'The Case for Brexit' follow Alan Sked on Twitter @profsked; READ more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion Load-Date: June 21, 2023  End of Document
