   Did Jesse and Sir Bill know 'charlatan' Boris Johnson was lying? Hereford Times July 1, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 396 words Byline: Charlotte Moreau Body   IT is notable that the seventh anniversary of the Brexit referendum was marked by the auto-defenestration of its chief proponent and architect, the now-disgraced charlatan and serial liar Boris Johnson. In the intervening years increasing numbers have come to realise that Brexit was promoted on a false prospectus and surveys show a large majority would now prefer that the UK had not left the EU. The economic damage of Brexit is clear. Just compare GDP, pre and post-Covid. Inward investment has plummeted, many small businesses have failed or are struggling and the pound sterling has lost more than 16 per cent of its value internationally, so we are all poorer (except perhaps for the extremely wealthy having offshore funds, who are probably the main beneficiaries of Brexit). ALSO READ: 'Dangerous' Herefordshire path obstruction could cause walkers to 'bleed out' Food hygiene: Hereford takeaway told improvement is needed Herefordshire company comes out on top at national awards It is understandable that many people believed the fraudulent arguments of the Brexit cadre (and some still do), as these were repeated and reinforced by most of the popular mainstream media, including the BBC. Which brings me to our local MPs. Both Sir Bill Wiggin and Jesse Norman were proponents of Brexit and Sir Bill wrote to me, regarding Johnson-s infamous -oven-ready deal-, saying: -I believe this deal makes good on the promises that were made, by the Prime Minister, myself and many others, during the 2016 EU Referendum campaign, by consolidating security, cooperation and trade, yet also making this country a truly independent nation...We will have thriving economic and commercial ties with our European neighbours without comprising our independence, or submitting to foreign laws. Businesses who rely on trade with the EU will be able to continue their operations without tariffs and quotas.- The questions I have for Herefordshire-s two elected representatives are these. Did they realise that Brexit would be the economic disaster that most economists predicted from the outset, but they nevertheless supported and promoted it? Or were they themselves also taken in by the lies of Johnson and others? IAN QUAYLE Fownhope What are your thoughts? You can send a letter to the editor to have your say by clicking here. Letters should not exceed 250 words and local issues take precedence. Load-Date: July 1, 2023  End of Document
