   Dispute over the "Rwanda solution "; Great Britain is regarded as a role model by advocates of outsourced asylum procedures. But London's plan fails because of the Council of Europe, which insists on human rights Die Welt (English) November 7, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Axel Springer SE All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Pg. 6; No. 216 Length: 1059 words Byline: Mandoline Rutkowski Body      London It has been almost four years since the UK officially left the EU. Today, we are confronted with the fact that the decision to leave the alliance was based on a fundamental fallacy. In the months leading up to the momentous referendum in 2016, Brexit advocates rhetorically cited leaving the EU as a condition for being able to control immigration again. "We want our country back, that's the only way we can control our borders," said Nigel Farage, then leader of the UKIP party, whose main aim was to leave Brexit. The message resonated with a large proportion of Britons and had historic consequences. Since Brexit, the UK has actually been free to decide whether EU foreigners are allowed to work in the country. However, this is usually overlooked: When it comes to illegal migration, the Council of Europe, which oversees the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), plays a crucial role, and the UK is still a member of this organization, which is completely independent of the EU, even after Brexit. And it is the judges of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), which reports to the Council of Europe, who have so far prevented the country from implementing a plan to curb illegal migration that is unprecedented in Europe. It is this plan that is now also being discussed in Germany under the heading of the "Rwanda solution ". Its proponents also have the British plans in mind. There, the ruling Conservatives want to outsource asylum procedures to Rwanda in future. Anyone entering the UK illegally would be taken to the East African country - where the asylum procedure would then also be carried out. Anyone who is granted asylum must remain in Rwanda as a safe third country, which is intended to eliminate the decisive pull factor that currently allows people to remain in the EU de facto even without the chance of asylum. As a result, fewer people are expected to make the dangerous journey across the English Channel, which saw 46,000 people enter the country last year. However, the judges of the ECtHR put a spoke in Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's wheel - and banned the first planned flight to Rwanda in June 2022. The Strasbourg court invoked Article 39 of its Rules of Procedure. This allows for "provisional measures" in exceptional cases where there is a risk of "irreparable harm" due to imminent expulsion, and the court argued that there were doubts about the guarantee of fair and efficient procedures for determining refugee status in Rwanda and the assessment as a "safe third country ". Since then, the British government and the ECHR have been wrangling. The case is currently before the Supreme Court, which intends to issue a ruling by the end of the year. If the judges rule that the transfer to Rwanda is legal, the first flights could take off in February 2024, as the Daily Mail reports. This is taking too long for some politicians. MPs are now calling for a reform of the Human Rights Convention, for its rulings to be ignored or even for the UK to leave. The stakes are high for Sunak. At the beginning of his term in office, he promised to stop boat migration across the English Channel. According to a recent YouGov poll, Conservative voters rate immigration control as the most important issue. So far, immigration figures via the route have fallen slightly. However, the prime minister does not have much time left to keep his promise, as parliamentary elections will be held next year. Sunak's party is trailing far behind Labor by around 20 percentage points. A start to deportations to Rwanda could bring in new votes. If, on the other hand, the Rwanda project is declared illegal, it could further fuel the discussion about leaving the Council of Europe. A step that would have a considerable impact on international treaties, for example with the EU. The European Convention on Human Rights is enshrined in the most important agreement governing the relationship between the two parties after Brexit: the Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA). Legal experts fear that Brussels could terminate the painstakingly negotiated agreement in the event of a British exit, and that in the case of security cooperation, for example in data exchange and cross-border criminal prosecution, Brussels could no longer rely on London making the same demands on the fulfillment of human rights. There is also the question of the UK's international reputation. All European countries are members of the Council of Europe, with the exception of Russia and Belarus. "The UK is less valued internationally anyway since leaving the EU," Rashmin Sagoo, head of the international law program at the Chatham House think tank, told WELT. "It would give up its seat at the negotiating table and thus its pioneering role in one of the world's leading human rights organizations - and with it important 'soft power'." However, it is clear that the UK has set the ball rolling with the debate, says the expert. In view of the increasing overload caused by rising immigration figures, many EU countries are also keeping a close eye on the debate in the UK, she said. France's Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin recently declared that he was prepared to go against the rulings of the Strasbourg court in order to take action against "dangerous" foreigners, as Paris had deported two convicted foreign criminals, contrary to the judgment of the ECHR. Austria is also planning a deportation program similar to the Rwanda project and has announced closer cooperation with London. In the German debate, North Rhine-Westphalia's Minister President Hendrik Wüst (CDU) and FDP parliamentary group leader Christian Dürr had proactively brought such a solution into the discussion. There is at least a reference to the issue of a third country solution in the coalition agreement between the two parties. The governing parties wanted to examine whether the determination of the protection status of refugees "is possible in exceptional cases in third countries in compliance with the Geneva Refugee Convention and the European Convention on Human Rights", it says. Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word. Original full page PDF Graphic    Boat migrants were rescued from the English Channel by British border guards Load-Date: November 6, 2023  End of Document
