   Dodgy statistics and even dodgier forecasts are making policy harder; External review of Bank of England's performance is long overdue - and should be carried out regularly The Daily Telegraph (London) September 11, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 18 Length: 1047 words Byline: JULIAN JESSOP Body   The unusually large 2pc revision to the gross domestic product gures produced by the Oce for National Statistics is only the latest of a series of issues with UK economic data and forecasts. Recent news on the public nances has also been better than predicted by the Oce for Budget Responsibility, while ination has of course been much higher for longer than forecast by the Bank of England. This stu matters. These numbers inform crucial decisions on both scal and monetary policy, they can inuence consumer and business condence, and they help to shape investor sentiment. In particular, excessive gloom about the economy in recent years - partly related to Brexit - has raised the cost of borrowing. This does not just apply to the interest rates paid by the Government, or households. As Simon French at Panmure Gordon has noted, the cost of equity capital for domestically focused companies has become markedly more expensive than for those companies with an international focus, despite similar business performances. The revised GDP data were at least good news. It turns out that the economy had already recovered to its pre-Covid size in 2021, some 18 months earlier than previously thought. Brexit Britain is no longer such a laggard after all. Indeed, the latest gures suggest UK growth has matched that of the eurozone (excluding Ireland's dodgy GDP data) both since the pandemic and since Britain's vote to leave the European Union in 2016. This is not in itself enough to prove that the economy has been largely untouched by Brexit. Some will still argue that we should have done better over this period, as America has done. Other countries might also revise their numbers up. But the evidence that the UK has already taken a big hit from Brexit has just become even weaker. An upward revision of almost 2pc to GDP is extraordinarily large, but these were also extraordinary times. The economy shrank by 25pc in just two months in early 2020, with huge shifts in the underlying patterns of activity. Data collection was also much more dicult. And the ONS is not alone. The Swiss national statistics oce is not usually known for a lack of precision. But the Swiss economy was recently estimated to have grown by 5. 4pc in 2021, revised up from 4.2pc, mainly due to the inclusion of more complete data for multinational companies in the manufacturing sector. If anything, ONS statisticians deserve more praise for incorporating new data relatively quickly, especially from tax records, and for doing a better job than most of measuring the impact of the pandemic on the output of public services. But something has still gone wrong. For a start, the recent upward revision to UK GDP followed a similarly large downward revision only a year or so earlier and the biggest contribution came from new gures for the wholesale and retail trade. Specialist economists - notably Harvir Dhillon at the British Retail Consortium - had agged up concerns about the old numbers some time ago. The ONS at least seems relatively open to outside help. Last week the ONS asked the Oce for Statistics Regulation to undertake a detailed review. This will cover the quality of the GDP data, the scope for more use of new and timelier evidence, and issues around communication (especially the degree of uncertainty). This is important and welcome. The OBR has been getting more grief as well. Again, this is only partly justied. For example, government borrowing in the first four months of the current scal year was £11.3bn less than the OBR had predicted. However, borrowing is the dierence between two much larger numbers - expenditure and income - both of which have a great many moving parts. Nailing the precise answer is like trying to predict the exact points spread in a rugby match. Some have also concluded that the large upward revision to the GDP data fatally undermines the OBR's assumption that Brexit will reduce UK productivity by 4pc. However, that is an assumption about the long-term impact, mainly via a reduction in international trade, not what happens to GDP in the first few years. To be clear, I still think the OBR is wrong, but for other reasons. None the less, there are big problems at the OBR too, not just with the quality of their forecasts but also - and more importantly - how they are used. We are in a crazy world where scal policy is set almost mechanically on the basis of a single set of forecasts that even the number crunchers themselves admit are highly uncertain. Spuriously accurate estimates about "scal headroom" are treated as gospel. How many people know that the main rule governing UK scal policy is that a particular measure of public sector debt has to be projected to fall between the fourth and fth year of a rolling ve-year horizon, based on OBR forecasts? I cannot imagine many families or businesses running their budgets in this way. But that is the fault of the Government, not the OBR. To use another sporting metaphor, the OBR is only the referee. Others write the rules. The mistakes at the Bank of England are arguably the most damaging. The former head of the US central bank, Ben Bernanke, has been asked to lead a review into the Bank's forecasting, which is long overdue. Hopefully this review will break with the groupthink which has gripped most of the world's major central banks. This would include engaging seriously with those outsiders who have been arguing, correctly, that the Bank was not paying enough attention to the monetary drivers of ination. The strength of the monetary aggregates in 2021 was also another clue that growth in the real economy was stronger than the original GDP data suggested. Indeed, these reviews should happen more often. New Zealand's central bank, which was an early adopter of ination targeting, has also led the way in having regular external reviews of its own performance. In short, numbers are not just for the nerds. Bad data and forecasts cloud policy decisions and undermine condence. It is worth investing a little more to get them right - or at least closer to the mark. But a healthy dose of scepticism will always be required. Julian Jessop (@julianhjessop) is an independent economist. Roger Bootle is away 'Hopefully this will break groupthink gripping most of the world's major central banks' Load-Date: September 11, 2023  End of Document
