   Don't romanticise rejoining the EU The Sunday Times (London) August 20, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS AND MONEY;NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 858 words Byline: David Smith Body   When, a week ago, I wrote about the UK's growth problem, underlined by GDP (gross domestic product) per head being lower than in late 2021, I said there was no obvious short-term fix. This met with a big response - on Twitter/X/or whatever it is called this weekend, in emails, online and elsewhere. Overwhelmingly, commenters said the way to fix the problem was to rejoin the EU or, failing that, the single market and customs union. Surveys on the decision to leave, monitored by the polling expert Professor Sir John Curtice on the What UK Thinks website, show that by an average of 60 to 40 per cent, people believe that leaving was wrong. Curtice's latest poll of polls shows 59 per cent support for rejoining, 41 per cent for staying out. People think that leaving has been bad for the economy, exacerbating the cost of living crisis and making it harder to sell goods abroad. The evidence is on their side. The post-financial crisis recovery in business investment was snuffed out by the referendum and has only just risen above its spring 2016 level. Leaving the single market has hurt exporters, as every survey reflects. Exports and imports are suffering. The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) expects that in the long run both will be 15 per cent lower than if the UK had remained in the EU. So far, imports, which in the second quarter were marginally higher than in late 2019, are holding up better. The OBR is sticking to its assumption that leaving will reduce UK long-run productivity by 4 per cent. On the cost of living crisis, detailed work by the London School of Economics' Centre for Economic Performance shows that of the 25-percentage point rise in UK food prices between December 2019 and March this year, eight percentage points - just under a third - were due to Brexit. Bringing all these effects together in a so-called doppelganger model - comparing UK performance with what it would have been had we not left - John Springford, of the Centre for European Reform (CER), estimates that last year the UK economy was more than 5 per cent smaller than if it had not left. The usual response to this is that the UK has done fine relative to other big EU economies since the referendum. But the EU, eurozone and France have significantly outgrown the UK since then, reversing the pre-2016 position. It is not just about numbers. Apart from being divisive, Brexit has had a disastrous effect on politics, trust in politicians and competence in government. Political talent was lost because it was on the wrong side of the divide. Without Brexit, we would never have had a Boris Johnson or Liz Truss government. So why not just rejoin? The first barrier is political. The Tories, given their membership, are not going to advocate rejoining. Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, had his fingers burnt when shadow Brexit secretary and does not want to touch it with a bargepole. Labour would try to improve on the thin and unsatisfactory border-in-the-Irish-Sea trade deal negotiated by Johnson. Rishi Sunak has also tried to improve on it with his Windsor Framework, but had little thanks from Ulster's unionists. Even if politics shifted, there would have to be the psychodrama of another referendum. Many voted on the false prospectus that the UK could exit and remain in the single market and customs union, others that it would mean net migration dropping to tens of thousands.Net migration last year was more than 600,000, nearly double the 330,000 figure for 2015. Economists do not think this a bad thing. The UK now has a bureaucratic but liberal migration regime, though the small-boats fiasco shows anything but taking back control. Were there to be another referendum, people would again be voting on a leap into the unknown. Membership terms on re-entering would be very different from before. The prodigal son would have to pay a penance, losing the opt-out from euro membership, and probably be required to join the Schengen zone. Leaving and then rejoining would do nothing for a reputation already hurt by Brexit. To avoid Britain becoming an in-out country, the EU would be seeking ways to lock in membership. While leaving was a huge policy error, we should not pretend all our problems derive from it. Low investment was an issue long before 2016. An Office for National Statistics study put the UK bottom of a table of more than 30 OECD countries for public and private investment as a percentage of GDP. Low UK business investment is longstanding. The productivity stagnation behind the abject living standards of recent years has been made worse by Brexit but began before 2016, starting around the time of the 2008-09 financial crisis. And so on. If, after the tortuous process of rejoining, or negotiating a new single market arrangement, we expected to wake up in a land of milk and honey, we might find the milk is sour and the honey not that sweet. Our problems, which are considerable, are ours to solve. If we could time travel back to 2016, it would help, but that is impossible. We have to deal with the possible. david.smith@sunday-times.co.uk While leaving was a huge error, not all our problems derive from it Load-Date: August 20, 2023  End of Document
