   EI and Bord Bia join forces on new post-Brexit support; EXPORT ADVICE Sunday Independent June 4, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS;NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 539 words Byline: MARY CLOAK Body   As our trading relationship with the UK changed in recent years, agile Irish businesses remained optimistic about opportunities in this market and made preparations to mitigate the impact on their operations. Businesses were generally more resilient in the face of this transition than what was initially feared, and exports to the UK from Enterprise Ireland supported companies remain strong and last year they increased by 13pc, now accounting for 29pc of all exports. While this is positive, there is no doubt that Brexit has affected companies in some sectors more than others, and in order to support such firms as they explore di- versification opportunities in new markets, a new offer has been launched to help companies to access a fast-track strategic market development programme. The aim of the new Post-Brexit Market Growth and Diversification Grant is to help eligible Brexit-impacted Enterprise Ireland and Bord Bia client companies to develop a strategy to enter and grow in new markets outside of the UK. Enterprise Ireland is proud to be working with Bord Bia to encourage Irish food exporters affected by Brexit to avail of this new grant. Fiona O'Shaughnessy, Prepared Consumer Foods, Bord Bia, outlines that "given its scale and importance, the UK remains our top priority market, albeit operating alongside a clear market diversi- fication strategy for product categories with over dependence". She added: "This new grant will assist companies to develop a robust market diversification strategy and understand where to play and how to win with this new funding support." This support aims to enable affected companies to approach opportunities in new markets strategically. The grant, which has been developed under the Brexit Adjustment Reserve fund, covers up to 80pc of the cost of hiring an industry expert consultant (up to a maximum grant of (EURO)36,000). In order to qualify, companies must have seen a reduction of 5pc or more in their UK sales in 2020, or 2021 or 2022, when compared with their 2019 sales. With the guidance and knowledge of an expert consultant, this new support will give recipients an opportunity to set out clear objectives for each of their target markets, define key performance indicators and to establish a roadmap for growth. Furthermore, recipients can collaborate with a consultant of their choice to work out how to allocate resources effectively, how to minimise risks, how to gather the right market intelligence and how to define target markets and customer segments. Grant recipients can also choose to work with an experienced consultant in Ireland or can ask Enterprise Ireland's overseas offices to help them identify a suitable in-market consultant. Along with the market entry strategy, the grant can also help recipients with scoping and developing market collateral based on localised customer profiles and segmentation. The support can also fund developing a digital marketing strategy for each target market. Interested companies must apply before June 30, and more information is available on the Enterprise Ireland website, www.enterprise-ireland.com/mgd, or through Enterprise Ireland Development Advisers. Mary Cloak is senior marketing adviser at Enterprise Ireland Load-Date: June 4, 2023  End of Document
