   Empty benches in the Commons showed the cowardice of Tory MPs The National (Scotland) June 21, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 1130 words Byline: Readers of The National Body   THE Privileges Committee merely formalised what the dogs in the street had known for decades. Boris de Pfeffel Johnson is a liar, narcissist and professional cad. He is the worst sort of human being, an amoral and arrogant coward with very limited powers of empathy and compassion and no conscience whatsoever. Yet he is the very sort of person that the Tory Party chose to lead them, claim a pyrrhic Brexit victory and run amok during a generation-defining global pandemic. All of this should inform any sentient individual that the Tory Party are simply not fit to run a jumble sale, never mind the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, like his counterpart in the USA, the genuinely ghastly Donald Trump, he is not short of supporters and apologists desperate to defend him and his disreputable actions. The parliamentary debate about the Privileges Committee-s recommendations resulted in approval for their report but the empty benches in the Commons screamed of the political cowardice of Tory MPs, their current leader and an ongoing reverence for the entitled buffoon that continues to pervade the Conservative Party. Johnson is still regarded as a vote-winner by some at Tory Party HQ and, like the rabid right-wing press, they would choose populism over parliamentary democracy as an enabler to continue in power and pursue a libertarian post-Brexit agenda that rewards the wealthy and penalises the poor. The populism espoused by Johnson, an unscrupulous braggart by nature, witnessed the imposition of a hugely damaging Brexit on the UK, a Brexit yearned for by unprincipled hedge fund managers like Crispin Odey and his like to literally cash in on the misery of the population at large whilst Johnson and his chums in parliament and in the media, including the BBC, exploited xenophobic and racist fears amongst the hoi polloi to make Brexit a reality. It is only now with the national shaming of Johnson that observers are daring to use the B word as a major contributory factor to the economic woes the UK continues to suffer and to the dangerously crypto-fascist immigration policies adopted by a reactionary Home Secretary. Ironically, the two nations that are suffering the most fallout from Johnson-s cavalier Brexit are Scotland and Northern Ireland, both of which voted Remain. Indeed, his willingness to place a hard-won peace in Northern Ireland at risk, mainly due to ignorance and apathy, is a mark of the contempt he and his colleagues hold for the people and parties in Northern Ireland, Unionist and Republican alike. READ MORE: New legal opinion outlines international routes to independence Similarly, his disdainful attitude to Scotland demonstrates the Tory Party-s breathtaking marginalisation of our devolved parliament that is underwritten by nodding donkeys like Alister Jack and -Murray- Ross (Johnson never ever mastered his leader in Scotland-s name, nuff said). However he has, for now at least, vacated the political stage and been welcomed as a columnist by the Daily Mail, a publication of dubious morality and accuracy. His shadow, as the turnout of Tory MPs in Parliament on Monday demonstrated, will remain stubbornly across their party and constrain the present Prime Minister, and any hope of a united, reconciled Conservative family. One-nation Conservatism has died on the altar of Johnson-s Brexit and his legacy may well cast his party to the political doldrums for a generation. Paradoxically, Scottish independence and Irish unity could be the beneficiaries of an English nationalist Brexit that this sawdust Mosley has validated and wrecked. Owen Kelly Stirling COST of living increases, mortgage interest rate increases, food bank usage increases, in-work poverty increases and debt increases are some of the things which affect us all and focus our minds. On Monday, the BBC-s Good Morning Scotland was interviewing Stephen Flynn. The interviewer Graham Stewart was more concerned by the importance of Nicola Sturgeon-s arrest last weekend and her statement to the press on Sunday. Flynn acquitted himself admirably. He seemed to be more than a little surprised that the questioner continued down the same track when the significant Commons privileges committee report on Johnson-s nefarious activities was to be debated in the Commons that afternoon. The video released by the Daily Mirror showed Conservative HQ staff in party mode. Partygate it was labelled and Partygate it certainly was, and Johnson lied to parliament several times saying it did not happen. He wore a suit made from Teflon whilst delivering his manufactured apology. What is more surprising is that there are still people who think he can do no wrong, that he has been -fitted up- by the PM and colleagues in a power play. Johnson cries -foul-, almost playing from the Donald J Trump playbook. It was indefensible, as Michael Gove stated, and I don-t like Gove particularly either. Rishi Sunak should have added his weight to the report, in support of the common people, who feel they are being let down by the elite Westminster political class, which Scotland has had to put up with and will be forced to continue put up with for some years to come unless we do something about it. The need for a written constitution is one of the steps on that route to independence. Alistair Ballantyne Angus AS has been pointed out, Alister Jack-s views on Scotland, Johnson-s legacy etc are quite delusional but I had to laugh (and why wasn-t he challenged on this and much else?) when he asserted in the Holyrood magazine interview -when I walked the streets with him in Scotland, people were incredibly supportive.- Which streets would they be, I wonder, given the tightly stage-managed, and rare, visits to Scotland by the disgraced former PM? Iain Black Edinburgh TWO excellent letters in Saturday-s issue. The first from Les Hunter arguing that it is not the A9 itself that is causing the accidents and deaths on this road, but the small minority of impatient drivers. I wholeheartedly agree! The second from Ian Lawson arguing that, as a nation, we need to reassess our priorities. Again, I am in wholehearted agreement! May I suggest that - with a view to killing two birds with one stone, as the saying goes - the government puts the money set aside for upgrading the A9, and possibly other capital projects, to better use, eg increase the minimum pay for all local and national government employees, NHS, social care et al to 15 per hour? That, I would suggest, would go a long way to lifting the spirits of the low-paid. Also, it would help keep the economy turning over, increase the amount collected in taxes (income and VAT) and increase government spending on other areas of the wellbeing economy. A win-win situation, really. What have we got to lose? Stay safe. George McKnight West Calder Load-Date: June 21, 2023  End of Document
