   Exporting to the U.K. after Brexit has shadows, but some take it better CE Noticias Financieras English June 17, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 625 words Body   As with the saying, when you ask the protagonists about the consequences of Brexit, everyone has their own opinion about the fair. The Icex admits that there was initial confusion, but the waters are returning to normal. In fact, it has just launched the Icex-Brexit Program, with funds from the European Commission, aimed at compensating for the new complications. For Elisa Carbonell, general manager of internationalization of the Icex company, the United Kingdom continues to be "an enormously attractive market, with which there is a very strong link. That is why it is important to understand the new scenario, in which the rules of the game have changed for the entire EU." Figures prove that more is already being exported to the UK than before the pandemic, but it is a market with less interest. "Since Brexit, there has been a drop of more than 50% in customers exporting there. There is no longer free trade and that has made the procedures more expensive. That's why this increase is nowhere near the levels of France or Germany," says Ricardo de Vera, professor of logistics at OBS Business School, who himself works in a freight forwarding firm. "If you are a micro-small business and the container rises above $15,000, you look for alternative markets." According to the London School of Economics itself, exports of British goods to the EU have fallen by 30% since the UK left the EU club. Certifications This is corroborated by Fidel Delgado, CEO of Neoalgae, an Asturian SME dedicated to microalgae biotechnology. "There are many difficulties and barriers to certification as a result of Brexit, which raises the economic costs to the point of making them unfeasible," he comments, and explains that registering a product exceeds 2,000 euros. "The European trademark registration is no longer useful and they require an accredited laboratory there, in addition to a warehouse." The situation in deficit markets is very different, as Javier Briones, export director of Grupo Tello, a producer of pork products, points out: "We are not a very affected sector. If you have a well-oiled logistics structure, the fact that there are more problems now is an acceptable procedure. When you have a product with added value, you immediately find a solution". In fact, says Briones, their figures - they export 40% of their production - have increased. Brexit will put Spanish contractors at a disadvantage in the United Kingdom. A similar case is that of Félix Solís Avantis, a company with wineries in the main appellations of origin in Spain, which exports to the UK a third of all the wine from our country that reaches the island, to which it allocates 20% of its production of 34 million liters per year. Félix Solís Jr., the firm's commercial director, acknowledges that at the beginning there was some chaos. "Containers were held in customs for up to eight weeks; today, it barely takes three days. And yes, there is more paperwork, but the initial crisis is over." The problem, he says, is that, in the absence of free trade with the EU, the British are signing agreements with third countries such as Chile, New Zealand.... But what is the case of SMEs without a dominant position or even an export department? Marina Larrañaga is in charge of Sarriegui, a potato chip company from San Sebastian with 10 workers that sells 16% of its production abroad. Specifically, "in the United Kingdom, last year we increased turnover by 25% thanks to new flavors. But sales are declining due to the devaluation of the pound sterling. In addition, import and export clearance is now required, shipping times have increased considerably and, on top of that, they require specific labeling. That's why we have focused on other European countries for export. Load-Date: June 18, 2023  End of Document
