   Farage's new crusade against all the banks; The former Brexit party leader has shown his uncanny ability to tap into the zeitgeist and unnerve the establishment. He now wants to expand the argument in British politics about 'woke' capitalism. Financial Times (London, England) July 29, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Asian Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 6 Length: 1598 words Byline: Jim Pickard; Stephen Morris Body   F resh from taking down one of the country's most important bankers, Nigel Farage has a new target: Britain's entire financial system. One of the principle architects of Brexit, Farage wants to be the standard bearer for the thousands of other people who have been stripped of their bank accounts and credit cards for political or other reasons. "I'm now a champion and crusader for men and women who have been closed down by the banks," Farage told the BBC. This new campaign kicked off a month ago when the 59-year-old Farage, a self-styled anti-elitist, complained he had been dropped as a longstanding client because of his politics by the most exclusive bank in Britain: Coutts. By this week, his pressure had led to the resignation of Dame Alison Rose, chief executive of parent company Nat- West, in a dramatic midnight boardroom meeting late on Tuesday. Coutts boss Peter Flavel also stood down, while Sir Howard Davies, chair of NatWest, is under heavy pressure. Farage's story has struck a nerve with the general public because it raised wider questions about the ability of banks to remove accounts without explanation, leaving them or their small businesses cut off from the mainstream financial system. In an increasingly cashless world, having a bank account has become an essential service. David Davis, former Brexit secretary, likens closing someone's bank account to cutting off their water or electricity supply. "You should be able to get a bank account regardless of your political views, whether you are a communist or a fascist." The story has also fed into a culture war backlash pushed by rightwing politicians on both sides of the Atlantic against the perceived over-reach of the corporate ESG agenda. Under Rose, NatWest and Coutts promoted an agenda built around the idea of "purpose", which included climate change, sustainable living and LGBTQ+ rights. Farage, the former Brexit party leader who is a friend of former US president Donald Trump, dubbed NatWest a "woke warrior". The resignations this week are "a sign that corporations and their leaders are being roped into the culture wars", says Professor André Spicer, dean of Bayes Business School. Rose quit after admitting she briefed a BBC journalist with misleading information about Farage. "What brought her down was not the decision itself [to close Farage's account]," adds Spicer. But she ended up "facing a tenacious culture warrior looking to make political capital out of this situation". Banks to the wall Even before Farage went to battle with Coutts, Britain's banks were already in the line of fire. As the cost of living crisis continues to bite, parliamentary committees have wanted to know why mortgage rates have risen faster than the returns on most deposit accounts. Farage's complaint spoke to a wider dissatisfaction with banks, which have closed more than 5,000 branches since 2015 and are yet to repair their reputa- tions after the financial crisis. NatWest is still 39 per cent owned by the government after its 2008 bailout, when it was known as RBS. "Farage is a divining rod for anger and outrage in this country. The closure of bank branches, the experience people have with their banks, the difficulty of doing anything online, means people don't hold banks in high regard," says John McTernan, a Labour former Downing Street adviser. Farage, who says he was refused bank accounts by at least nine banks because of his political profile, is launching a campaign for the rights of others who have lost their accounts because of their views. "Since I told my own story this month, I have been inundated with tales from others in genuine distress who have also suffered the indignity of being 'de-banked'." As regulators and law enforcement have tightened the rules on money laundering in recent years, there has been a steady increase in individuals suddenly losing their bank accounts with no clear reason or right to appeal. A huge proportion of those cases are due to suspected financial crime. Adam Hadley, executive director of Tech Against Terrorism, an online counter-terrorism group, says Farage had raised "valid concerns about potential over-reach" by banks, but says there still needs to be "careful safeguards to stop harmful actors". But many cases have no such connection. Peter Fudakowski, a 68-year-old Oscar-winning film producer, had his business account closed by NatWest. In March the Financial Ombudsman Service ruled against him on the basis the account was not being used. But Fudakowski says the account had six figures in it earmarked for filming, which was paused during the pandemic. "I wasted so much time and energy on this, [the decision] was irrational, illogical and unfair. What was I supposed to do?" he told the Financial Times. "They use all sorts of excuses to get rid of you." NatWest said it had "acted proactively in this case ... writing to the customer to outline clearly what was needed and extending the deadline several times". In February, a Facebook group called "NatWest closed down my account" had already reached 8,600 members, even before the Farage publicity. (It has 10,800 now.) Participants have been sharing information on how to submit a data subject access request, or DSAR, to the lender to find out the real reason why they have been excluded. This was the tactic that Farage used to obtain a 40-page dossier that proved Coutts had been planning to jettison him for months. Memos revealed its reputational risk committee said he was "pandering to racists" and a "disingenuous grifter". His politics were deemed "at odds with our position as an inclusive organisation". Bankers admit they are constantly trying to balance the risk of reputational damage with commercial considerations. A senior figure at NatWest conceded that Farage, despite Coutts's dim view of his politics, was unlikely to have been abandoned if he were a billionaire. HSBC and Standard Chartered - which are based in London but make the vast majority of their profits in emerging markets, particularly Asia and China - face even trickier geopolitical questions. In 2020, StanChart closed all bank accounts it operated for embassies after a review found many were flouting strict compliance and anti-money laundering rules under the guise of diplomatic privilege, leaving it vulnerable to regulatory censure. To avoid upsetting any individual country - in particular China - it decided to close every one, not just the worst offenders, the FT has previously reported. One rival banking executive says they are worried about a deluge of complaints and regulatory sanctions now public awareness about account closures has increased. Bill Winters, Standard Chartered's chief executive, says that it is always complicated for banks to "navigate the cross-currents of various laws and sanctions", but that banks should not screen clients for their politics and public statements. "I suggest we accept the apologies, and the extraordinary acts of resignation and move on," he adds. Yet many of those individuals who have lost their bank accounts say a reckoning was long due. The number of entrepreneurs seeing their business accounts closed has accelerated in recent years, according to Craig Beaumont, chief of external affairs at the Federation of Small Businesses. "It's good that the government has finally acted on this. It's a shame it took Nigel Farage for them to do it." The other reason Farage's fight with NatWest has such resonance is the outsized political influence he continues to enjoy - even though he does not occupy any elected office. A rightwing Eurosceptic, Farage was underestimated for years in the run-up to the 2016 Brexit referendum, which the Leave campaign won against the odds, leading to the resignation of prime minister David Cameron in the process. This week's episode shows that he retains an uncanny ability to tap into the political zeitgeist and unnerve the establishment. Although no longer on the frontline of politics, Farage remains honorary president of the Brexit party's successor vehicle, Reform UK, which is polling at about 8 per cent. Tory ministers are anxious about the idea of Farage actively re-entering politics at the expense of their party's core vote, as polls show the Conservatives trailing their main opponents, the Labour party. Within days of Farage first raising his concerns about Coutts in late June, Rishi Sunak, the prime minister, said it would "not be right" for a bank to shut an account of someone "exercising their right to lawful free speech". The Treasury has since accelerated changes to banking rules so they have to give longer notice - and clearer explanations - when they dump clients. "The [Tory] party is very worried that Nigel Farage is putting together a slate of candidates for the next election," says Tim Montgomerie, a former adviser to Boris Johnson in Downing Street. Some campaigners hope the Farage imbroglio will highlight the broader issue that some 1.3mn adults in the UK do not have a bank account, according to FCA estimates. "I've seen this over and over with refugee clients that I work with," says Nina Mohanty, an adviser at Talent Beyond Boundaries, which provides employment for refugees. "They try and go to a bank and it's usually the high street banks who say, sorry computer says no." Additional reporting by Siddharth Venkataramakrishnan and Rafe Uddin 'You should be able to get a bank account regardless of your political views, whether you are a communist or a fascist' 'It's good that the government has finally acted on this. It's a shame it took Nigel Farage for them to do it' Graphic    The self-styled anti-elitist Nigel Farage has fanned the flames of the culture war this week after being dropped from the most exclusive bank in Britain Ewan White Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
