   Farage: report into debanking is 'whitewash'; He dismisses fundings of investigation, concluding that his treatment by NatWest was not 'political' The Daily Telegraph (London) October 28, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 1322 words Byline: Gordon Rayner Body   NIGEL FARAGE has dismissed a report into the closure of his bank accounts as a "whitewash" after it found the decision was made for commercial, not political reasons. The former Ukip leader said it was "laughable" that the law firm Travers Smith had concluded there was no evidence that his stance on Brexit or his political views were factors in the decision by Coutts to debank him. The chief executives of Coutts and its owner NatWest both resigned after it emerged that the committee that closed his accounts decided Mr Farage's views did not "align" with the bank's. Earlier this week it emerged that some senior NatWest stahad even discussed using anti-terrorism laws to justify closing the accounts. The Information Commissioner (ICO) ruled on Wednesday that former Nat- West boss Dame Alison Rose had breached data protection rules when sharing details about Farage's banking. She falsely told a journalist the debanking was done for commercial reasons. She later stated this is what she had been told at the time. Yet the Travers Smith report states: "For the avoidance of doubt, Travers Smith do not consider there to be any evidence that the client's pro-Brexit stance, or his party-political aliations, were factors in the exit decision." The report says Mr Farage was referred to Coutts's wealth reputational risk committee because of comments he made in January 2022 about Black Lives Matter and in April 2022 relating to "his alleged Russian links", but concludes that by the time the committee met in November 2022, commercial considerations had become dominant. Mr Farage said: "The long-anticipated Travers Smith report has whitewashed the decision to close my accounts at Coutts Bank. This comes as little surprise to me given Travers Smith's Emeritus Chair, Chris Hale, is a pro-Remain lawyer who once described Brexiteers as racist and xenophobic. Travers Smith has taken a very mealy-mouthed approach to this complex issue. The law rm argues that my political views 'not aligning with those of the bank' was not in itself a political decision. This is laughable. Worse still, Travers Smith did not nd 'any evidence' that my pro-Brexit stance was a factor in the exit decision. The word Brexit appeared no less than 86 times in [their response to] my Subject Access Request. What planet are they living on?" the evidence (documentary and witness) was not entirely consistent, Travers Smith consider that, on balance, it was predominantly a commercial decision. "  The review concluded that: "Whilst"However, in describing it as such, it is important to recognise that there is no universally agreed denition of the term 'commercial', just as there is no universally agreed denition of, for example, the term 'political'." '."  The report says that "the commercial rationale for the decision was clear" because its relationship with Mr Farage (who is only referred to as "the client") was "sigcantly loss-making". commercial factors were "at the forefront of the minds" of the wealth reputational risk committee when it decided in November 2022 to close Mr Farage's accounts, using "metrics which were of general applicability to all politically exposed persons (PEPs) or high risk clients", the report says. As Mr Farage was a PEP, the costs involved in administering his account outweighed the profit the bank made, more so once his mortgage had been paid o, it said. The report accepts there were "other factors" in the decision, and that Mr Farage's statements on "the environment, race, gender and migration", were considered by the committee, which amounted to "reputational risk".But it says: "Repu- tational risk, and non-alignment with purpose (and any associated reputational risk) were not, in Travers Smith's view, factors that drove the exit decision. The law rm considers it "highly probable" that Mr Farage would not have been debanked if he had been a "commercially viable" client. The report criticises Coutts for failing to explain to Mr Farage the reasons for his account closures, and in particular the fact that letters sent to him used a "nancial crime exit letter template", which was an error. Mr Farage said: "All this says so much about the culture created by Alison Rose, who has now been found by the ICO to have breached my privacy during this scandal - something this report fails to mention at all. The Travers Smith report is inconclusive and ignores the elephant in the room. What really matters now is the next steps that the ICO takes and, perhaps more importantly, what the FCA, the regulator of this industry, does about this scandal." "  NatWest Group Chairman Sir Howard Davies, said: "This report sets out a number of serious failings in the treatment of Mr Farage. Although Travers Smith confirm the lawful basis for the exit decision, thefundings set out clear shortcomings in how it was reached as well as failures in how we communicated with him and in relation to client con- dentiality. We apologise once again to Mr Farage for how he has been treated. His experience fell short of the standards that any customer should expect. Our job now is to make sure that does not happen again. "The bank is committed to implementing all the recommendations made by Travers Smith and we are making substantive changes to our policies and procedures, in particular to ensure that the lawfully protected beliefs or opinions of customers do not play any role in our decision making. The Board is considering the fundings and deciding on the appropriate outcomes on other matters. It is important we have regard to all necessary processes and due consideration of issues including the bank's obligations around privacy and condentiality." Laughable discrepancies Dierences between the report's fundings and what Coutts and its stahave previously said Report says: The decision by the wealth reputational risk committee of Coutts bank (WRRC) in November 2022 to close the accounts was "predominantly a commercial decision". Coutts "considered its relationship with the client to be commercially unviable". Discrepancy: An internal memo obtained from Coutts by Mr Farage includes a brieng given to members of the WRRC stating: "Client has recently been declassied from Higher Risk PEP [politically exposed person] to Lower Risk PEP. Following declassication, the client's eligibility criteria is now sucient to retain on commercial basis." Report says: "Reputational risk, and nonalignment with Purpose (and any associated reputational risk) were not, in Travers Smith's view, factors that drove the exit decision. They consider it to be highly probable the exit decision would not have been made had Coutts deemed the relationship with the client to be commercially viable." Discrepancy: Minutes of the WRRC meeting in November 2022 state: "The committee did not think continuing to bank NF [Nigel Farage] was compatible with Coutts given his publicly-stated views that were at odds with our position as an inclusive [bank]. This was not a political decision but one centred around inclusivity and purpose." Report says: "Travers Smith do not consider there to be any evidence that the client's pro-Brexit stance, or his party-political aliations, were factors in the exit decision." Discrepancy: In the 40-page dossier handed to Mr Farage by Coutts, the word Brexit appears 86 times. Under a section headed "Key risks: reputational risk" it states: "NF is 'high prole' and actively courts controversy, this leads to more prole and maintains his presence in the spotlight." Report says: Dame Alison Rose, then chief executive of NatWest, made an "honest mistake" when she discussed closing Mr Farage's Coutts account with the BBC's Simon Jack, thinking it was in the public domain. Discrepancy The BBC said Mr Jack contacted Dame Alison the day after their conversation to check she was happy for him to report that Mr Farage's account was closed for commercial reasons. She reportedly gave him her blessing. Graphic    Mr Farage has always maintained that his debanking by NatWest was a political act as a result of his public opinions Load-Date: October 28, 2023  End of Document
