   First day of the Covid Inquiry and leading lawyer's already pointing finger at Brexit!; COVID INQUIRY: DAY ONE Scottish Daily Mail June 14, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 455 words Byline: Ryan Hooper Body   BREXITEERS were outraged yesterday after it was suggested to the Covid Inquiry that leaving the EU had interfered with the Government's preparations for a pandemic. Hugo Keith KC, the inquiry's lead lawyer, said it was his 'fear' that attention paid to the risks of a no-deal exit 'drained' the resources and capacity that should have been used to counter future crises. Lawyers for bereaved families also echoed concerns that the Government was preoccupied with Brexit in their opening statements to the first day of public hearings in the three-year official inquiry. Brexiteer Tory MP Craig Mackinlay said it was 'quite remarkable' that anti-Brexit arguments should be aired 'in the forum of the Covid Inquiry'. He said: 'The Government has ample bandwidth to deal with Brexit, pandemic preparedness, international crises, and the general requirements of running an advanced nation.' He described the intervention as 'both fanciful and distasteful'. A Government source added: 'It's a classic twisting of events, warped forever by leftist lawyers.' Mr Keith told Baroness Hallett, the inquiry's chairman, that the pandemic had struck in early 2020 just as the country was leaving the EU. 'That departure required an enormous amount of planning and preparation, particularly to address what were likely to be the severe consequences of a no-deal exit on food and medicine supplies, travel and transport, business borders and so on,' he said. 'It is clear that such planning, from 2018 onwards, crowded out and prevented some or perhaps a majority of the improvements that central government itself understood were required to be made to resilience planfact ning and preparedness. Did the attention therefore paid to the risks of a no-deal exit - Operation Yellowhammer as it was known - drain the resources and capacity that should have been continuing the fight against the next pandemic...? Or did all that generic and operational planning in lead to people being better trained and well marshalled and, in fact, better prepared to deal with Covid and also to the existence of improved trade, medicine and supply links? 'My lady, on the evidence so far, but it will be a matter for you, we very much fear that it was the former.' Pete Weatherby KC, representing the UK bereaved families campaign group, said the Government's strategy for dealing with a pandemic 'was stalled because of the preoccupation with readiness for Brexit'. Neasa Murnaghan KC, on behalf of the Northern Ireland Department of Health, admitted Brexit preparations had diverted focus away from preparing for a pandemic. But she added there were advantages associated with EU exit preparations, including larger stockpiles of medicines. 'A classic twisting of events' Load-Date: June 14, 2023  End of Document
