   From odd couple to dream team i-news December 8, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 39 Length: 1491 words Byline: Tom Nicholson Body   Rory Stewart and Alastair Campbell are imagining what it would take for the former to bury the hatchet with Boris Johnson. Stewart is spluttering; Campbell is laughing. It might happen, they agree. But it'll probably be a last-minute job before Stewart dies. We are in Embankment, in central London, in the green room of the studio where they record their twice-weekly current affairs podcast The Rest Is Politics. After an extended session recording this week's two episodes, Campbell is settled into a squishy corner sofa with a cup of tea. Stewart is nibbling at a flapjack. Since March 2022, The Rest Is Politics has taken up permanent residence at the top of the podcasting charts. Its relaxed, chatty but deeply informed approach to current affairs at home and across the world isn't unique - its rival The News Agents, with Jon Sopel, Emily Maitlis and Lewis Goodall does it, too - but its accidental discovery of this oppositesattract double-act is hard to replicate. (And copycat twists seem to spring up weekly - including Political Currency with former chancellor George Osborne and ex-shadow chancellor Ed Balls.) It has defined itself against the skittish coverage of a tumultuous period in Britain as the return of adults to the room. The first time Stewart and Campbell remember speaking was not long after the Brexit referendum, in the garden of the Labour MP Stephen Kinnock. "We were so locked into the whole Brexit thing that I was probably thinking, 'How can I persuade this guy to get to a more absolutist position?'" says Campbell. "And Rory was probably thinking, 'Is there any point in trying to persuade this guy to get to a more sensible position?'" That was it for a while. But then podcasting house Goalhanger got in touch with Campbell about doing his own show. The conceit was to pair him Continued from page 39 with a Tory talking head; at one point, Dominic Cummings was in the frame. Campbell put it to his Twitter followers, who overwhelmingly recommended Stewart. After an encouraging pilot episode, they agreed to give it a month and see how they went. Their timing was uncanny: the first recording was a week after Putin's invasion of Ukraine. Initially, the draw was their insider knowledge, but as the slightly brisk early episodes softened, the podcast's real appeal started to emerge. It was accessible, played unabashedly to the centre, and the pair's budding friendship revealed each man's different sides. Though Campbell is particularly trenchant, and both like lightly winding the other up, neither are minded to say things to provoke outrage. It has made The Rest Is Politics a little oasis of reason in the middle of a deeply chaotic time, and an antidote to division and polarisation. The show was built on the idea they would be a political odd couple: Stewart the high-minded idealist fascinated by Alexander the Great but politely baffled by pop culture; Campbell the gritty results man. But in truth they are less dissimilar than all that. They both hate Brexit, both loathe Johnson, both came to the same conclusions about Israel and Gaza, both treasure the institutions and norms of British politics, and both separately released books despairing at its necrotic, dysfunctional state this year. Both also have their blind spots over their former parties. "There was a period when Rory's Tory tribalism, I think, made him too supportive of Rishi Sunak in the early days," says Campbell. That's certainly faded. "Yeah," Stewart cuts in, "now he's not made me foreign secretary." The formula worked. Now it averages 2.4 million downloads a week between the main show on Tuesday and a chattier mailbag episode on Wednesday, plus the spin-off Leading podcast in which they interview political heavyweights from across the world. They sell out live shows at the Royal Albert Hall and the London Palladium. There are unofficial T-shirts with their faces on, with the Truss-baiting caption "the anti-growth coalition". "I don't think either of us feel any pressure to have a relationship other than what we are putting out there the whole time," says Campbell. "It's quite natural; we're not forcing anything." Perhaps more remarkable than its popularity is how the podcast has encouraged a turnaround in public perceptions of its presenters. It seemed that Campbell and Stewart's stints as political animals was over. Stewart had been forced out of Johnson's Tory Party after a failed surprise tilt for leadership in 2019 and a fizzled-out attempt to challenge Sadiq Khan in the London mayoral election in 2020. He had moved to Jordan to run a charity he co-founded to restore a Roman site on the edge of the Golan Heights. He seemed well-meaning, but too odd to thrive in Westminster. But the podcast has proven the perfect place for his gentle, unhurried, literate style. Campbell, the New Labour spin doctor who served as Tony Blair's spokesman, campaign director, press secretary and head of communications between 1994 and 2005, was expelled from the Labour Party by Jeremy Corbyn in 2019. He had busied himself with protesting against Brexit, returning to journalism as editor-at-large of The New European and becoming heavily involved in the ultimately fruitless People's Vote campaign for a second referendum. His involvement in the build-up to the Iraq War made him deeply unpopular with many on the left. That hasn't entirely changed, but The Rest Is Politics has helped him morph into a kind of gruff but cuddly centreleft uncle. Aside from discussing events in Westminster and Washington, The Rest Is Politics regularly sounds an alarm about the rise of populism and the erosion of trust in democracy and the media. This year they have given more time to in-depth discussions about single issues too: the Israel-Gaza conflict, Yevgeny Prigozhin and, on the 20th anniversary of Iraq, a lengthy relitigation of the Blair government's decision to go to war. "Even though Rory was asking very difficult questions, I never at any moment thought he was doing it to prove a point or because he's hoping that I'll suddenly say something I've never said before," says Campbell. "He did it because of a genuine sense of inquiry." Given the tumult of the past 18 months, it has been fascinating to hear their opinions changing in real time. The relief with which Stewart greeted Sunak's premiership after Johnson and Liz Truss has abated, for instance, and he now registers his incredulity at Sunak's lack of grip. The contempt he holds for Johnson may shift too, but mostly for his own wellbeing. "I do think that, as time goes on, I need to find a way of doing something which sounds terrible, which is forgiving Boris Johnson. I need to get beyond my sort of vengeful mania." Campbell stirs at this. "I don't agree," he says, sitting up. "I really don't agree. Our politics will not recover from this period unless Johnson and Truss are absolutely banished from public life." Their dynamic i s wa r m , a n d with good-natured needling on safe areas: Stewart's obliviousness about sport; Campbell's love of bagpiping. I wonder whether they ever feel a generation gap - Campbell is 66 years old, while Stewart is 50. "We're both products of that extraordinary shape of the '89-2004 age of optimism," says Stewart. Both entered politics in the relatively carefree mid-90s: Stewart joined the Foreign Office after Oxford, having spent nine months of a gap year as a second lieutenant in the Black Watch after the fall of the Soviet Union. The Rest Is Politics has become a place of catharsis for the wearied and angry. An end, if it comes, to the Conservative government next year could change that. Are they worried that if politics calms down, they'll lose their audience? Campbell isn't: only about 40 per cent of their audience is in the UK, he says. "I think if there's a new government, that's gonna be interesting in itself," he says. A Labour administration won't take the sting out of the podcast, he insists - though he will give it the benefit of the doubt. "He's going to do a lot more than that," Stewart says, unconvinced. Come the election, there are no plans to return to frontline politics for either - though Stewart thinks their podcast experience would make them better politicians. Are they glad they haven't had to deal with the past few years - of Brexit, the pandemic, war in Europe and the Middle East, the cost of living crisis - themselves? "I think it would have been very tough, but I wish I'd been in government," says Stewart, eyes wide. "I'd never underestimate how brutal it must have been. But I wonder whether I would have made all the right calls." 'The Rest Is Politics' is available on all podcast platforms. 'Politics on the Edge' by Stewart (Jonathan Cape, £22) and 'But What Can I Do? by Alastair Campbell' (Penguin, £10.99) are out now. 'The Rest Is Politics Live' is at the Royal Albert Hall on 14 December Our politics will not recover unless Johnson and Truss are banished from public life Load-Date: December 7, 2023  End of Document
