   High-end manufacturers fear Brexit jeopardises place in EU supply chains; Report highlights risks to productivity as export friction and falling confidence in UK harm industry Financial Times (London, England) June 29, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 3 Length: 1107 words Byline: PETER FOSTER Body   A recent rash of "big pharma" investments in Ireland by the likes of Pfizer, AstraZeneca and Eli Lilly is worrying Dave Seaward, co-founder of 3P Innovation, which makes automated machines used in the production of vaccines and other medicines. Seaward said business had boomed before the UK left the EU single market but since 2016 the company had battled Brexit headwinds, including engineers returning home to the EU and border bureaucracy that had complicated 3P's pan-European supply chains. With clients in Ireland saying privately that their global parent companies are keen to remove UK risk from their businesses, Seaward fears for the long-term future of British industries like his that are reliant on integrated supply chains that criss-cross the EU. "If big pharma retreats to places like southern Ireland, it puts my business at a competitive disadvantage to one inside the EU," he said. "Big corporations are risk-averse and now, after Brexit, they see the UK as risky." According to an in-depth report by trade economists released this month, high-end UK manufacturing that feeds into EU supply chains is going to find itself being increasingly squeezed by the challenges of post-Brexit trade. Nearly 50 per cent of UK manufacturing exports to the EU are so-called "intermediate" in nature, feeding components into EU supply chains that are then often exported onwards to the rest of the world as finished products. The report by the Resolution Foundation said the UK's global exports in the first three months of this year were 17 per cent below the levels before the EU-UK trade deal came into force three years ago, and warned the UK's more advanced manufacturers would be supplanted by lower-productivity domestic manufacturing in the longer term. It cited the UK car industry's recent struggles to attract investment to build the battery factories needed for the electric car revolution as a harbinger of the future challenges facing other highvalue sectors, including machinery, chemicals and computer equipment manufacturing. "Although these [EU-UK] supply chains will take time to disentangle, they will shrink the UK's high productivity manufacturing - from chemicals to spacecraft - as they do," the report warned. With manufacturing accounting for nearly 50 per cent of UK exports, the report added that the structural shift would further contribute to the longstanding productivity crisis that has weighed on the country since 2008. "Policymakers need to face the choice over whether or not to stay part of EU supply chains, to support high productivity manufacturers, and they need to accept that doing so means addressing the EU border," the report said. Trevor Mathers, the managing director of Alfa Chemicals, a medium-sized chemicals importer and distributor in Bracknell, Berkshire, said the air of instability around the UK's regulatory and industrial policies also threatened future investments. The chaos of the shortlived Liz Truss government last year, rising corporate tax rates and the uncertainty aroundUK regulation, which no longer tracks EU rules in sectors such as cars, chemicals and medical devices, have also weighed on investors. "Nothing will disappear overnight, but chemical plants are 20-40 year investments and talking to people we work with in Europe, they see economic and political instability in the UK compared with the EU," Mathers said. A survey of US businesses this month by BritishAmerican Business, a transatlantic trade association, saw confidence in the UK slipping for the third straight year, with two-thirds of US businesses putting improving EU-UK trade relations among their top three priorities. Make UK, the industry lobby, last month called for a Royal Commission to build an industrial policy for the UK, warning of further pressures from the $396bn US green subsidy programme and EU regulatory policies, including the introduction of a carbon border tax. Stephen Phipson, chief executive, said that while there was now a "bit of realism" from the government on the limited benefits of Brexit divergence, there was still a need to develop a coherent strategy for the sector, which includes myriad smaller companies that support big manufacturers in cars, pharma, chemicals and aerospace. "What we have seen so far, is a large reduction in the variety of products in trade with the EU and concentration on larger, higher-tech companies. The question we must ask is, 'would Airbus make all their wings in the UK, if they were making that decision now'?" Adam Vicary, the chief executive of Castings, a Midlands-based foundry business that makes components for the heavy truck industry, with EU clients including Volvo, Scania and DAF, said he was concerned over the UK's future position vis-à-vis Europe. Vicary said that Castings had not lost its pre-existing contracts with EU customers but rising UK energy costs compared with those in the EU, coupled with additional Brexit bureaucracy, risked undermining his company's ability to win contracts for future models. "My worry is that over the next few years, the UK's energy policy erodes our competitiveness and suddenly EU companies are asking 'why should we go with the UK, when it is no longer cheaper and we have got all this Brexit rubbish to deal with'?" he said. The Department for Business and Trade said the government had provided support, including an Export Support Service, to help UK manufacturers trade globally. "The government has pursued a clear strategy for UK manufacturing with a variety of support schemes that ensure sectors from auto, to aerospace, to low-carbon technologies have access to the funding, talent and infrastructure they need." 'Nothing will disappear overnight, but people we work with see instability in the UK compared with the EU' UK high value-added manufacturing is closely integrated with EU supply chains Share of UK goods trade with EU for manufacturing sectors, 2018 (%)  Intermediate Final  0 20 40 60  Manufacturing Textiles, clothing, leather and related products Food products, beverages and tobacco Computer, electronic and electrical equipment Chemicals and pharmaceutical products Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers Machinery and equipment n.e.c* Other transport equipment  Sources: Resolution Foundation; OECD * Not elsewhere classified UK lags behind the majority of G7 countries in goods exports Index of goods exports values (Q4 2018=100, G7 countries)  Chemicals  UK Average  Vehicles Range of G7 countries  200 150 100 50  200 150 100 50  2018 19 20 21 22  2018 19 20 21 22 Other manufacturing  Agri-food  200 150 100 50  200 150 100 50  2018 19 20 21 22  2018 19 20 21 22 Graphic    Concerned: Dave Seaward of 3P Innovation and, below right, Adam Vicary of Castings Andrew Fox/FT Load-Date: June 28, 2023  End of Document
