   Holiday firms can't offer full package as Brexit leads to fewer reps The Times (London) June 15, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 511 words Byline: Ben Clatworthy Body   From the friendly face at the chalet after a day on the slopes to the cheerful nanny to the hungover rep waiting for bleary eyed arrivals at the airport, the British seasonaire has been the mainstay of package holidays for decades. Alas, no more. Villa staff, resort reps, childminders, sailing instructors and lifeguards have all been cut after Brexit, reducing the number of services available to holidaymakers. Holiday companies have reported a 69 per cent drop in the number of seasonal workers, curtailing what they can offer clients. The report by The trade bodies Abta and Seasonal Businesses in Travel (SBiT) showed that the number of Britons fulfilling tourism roles overseas has fallen from 11,970 in 2017 to 3,700 this year. This disproportionately affects young people who typically fill such season.al jobs, working for holiday companies in a year off or during the university summer break. Holiday companies said they faced complex bureaucracy, extra costs and a lack of agreements with EU countries, which make it impossible to operate as they did before Brexit, and holiday prices for consumers are increasing. The report said: "This is proving an enormous challenge for travel companies, with 61 per cent saying that problems with hiring UK seasonal staff could reduce their possibilities for growth [in] the next five years." It was the top concern in the survey of 170 travel businesses. SBiT estimates that it now costs an extra £880 to recruit each British seasonal worker to France, the most popular UK ski destination. Luke Petherbridge, the director of public affairs at Abta, called on ministers to extend the Youth Mobility Scheme to the EU. The initiative allows young people to work in the UK and EU for up to two years, with no automatic right to remain in the long term. The UK has similar arrangements with Australia, Canada and New Zealand. The travel trade also called for an enhanced seasonal mobility agreement with the EU for tourism workers. Petherbridge said: "There is nothing stopping us doing this. It is mutually beneficial, not least for the individuals who take part and get to live and work overseas. The mobility scheme does not confer any longer-term rights to remain for those that have taken part." Brexit has been particularly harsh on winter ski businesses, especially chalet holiday operators as the concept is peculiarly British. Before Brexit chalet staff were typically employed on British contracts and "seconded" to Europe for the season. They were paid little but received food, board and a season lift pass. Charles Owen, the managing director of SBiT, said: "We rely on UK staff being able to work in the EU to help our businesses grow and thrive but [we can not do this] without a sensible arrangement on labour mobility." Baroness Vere of Norbiton, the aviation minister, said she would like to see "more youngsters be able to work in the EU" but "we have to put that in the context of our relationship with the EU and our other priorities at the time". Decline of holiday reps must be reversed, leading article, page 25 Load-Date: June 15, 2023  End of Document
