   Home repossession fears over -Westminster-s mortgage crisis- The National (Scotland) August 30, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 442 words Byline: Judith Duffy Body   THE number of homes being repossessed has risen sharply across Scotland since the pandemic, triggering concerns over the impact of -Westminster-s mortgage crisis-. Data commissioned by the SNP from the House of Commons Library, has revealed there were 1187 repossession cases initiated across Scotland during 2020-21 - up from just 91 the previous year. The total was down on numbers recorded pre-pandemic, which stood at 2056 in 2017-18. However a charity recently warned the number of people seeking advice about repossession evictions has increased three-fold in the last year. Previous research has also found that a typical family in Scotland, on an average two-year fixed-rate mortgage of 6.85%, is now facing paying around 1130 a month. That is a 439 more in interest per month, and 5268 more in interest a year, than they would have paid less than two years ago. READ MORE: Douglas Ross completely ignores Brexit in new economic plans Speaking ahead of campaigning in Cambuslang for the Rutherglen and Hamilton West by-election, SNP candidate Katy Loudon said households were -paying the price- after the economy had been trashed by the Tory government. Along with David Linden MP, the SNP-s social justice spokesperson at Westminster, she will today speak to locals in Cambuslang to hear more about how the cost-of-living crisis is impacting them. The figures show there were 311 repossession cases in Glasgow and Hamilton last year - up from just 10 in 2020-21. Loudon said: "The Tories and pro-Brexit Labour Party have trashed the UK economy - and households in Rutherglen and Hamilton West are left paying the price. We deserve better than Westminster-s mortgage crisis and Brexit. "By voting SNP in this by-election you will be voting for real opposition to the Tories and to send a message to the Westminster establishment that we reject their mortgage crisis, their Brexit and their Tory austerity in favour of a fairer, wealthier Scotland with independence.- READ MORE: UK Government quietly admits Brexit will drive up inflation Linden added: -Leading economists, including former Bank of England governor Mark Carney, have acknowledged that Brexit is a leading cause of the UK's higher and more stubborn rate of inflation, compared with our European neighbours. "It-s time Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer realised that too and let go of their damaging ideological policy. "It's essential that the next government - whether that be Tory or Labour - follow Scotland's lead by ditching their Tory austerity policies and matching progressive policies like the Scottish Child Payment, and helping those who are struggling to pay sky-high mortgages and rents.- Load-Date: August 30, 2023  End of Document
