   Home news in brief The Independent - Daily Edition September 27, 2023 Wednesday First Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Print Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 748 words Body   Paedophile who crashed car into Downing Street is spared jail An IT worker who rammed his car into the gates of Downing Street and caused a massive security alert has avoided a jail sentence. Seth Kneller from Crewe was also found with indecent images of children on his phone shortly after armed police arrested him at the scene. The 43-year-old had posted a video to TikTok shortly before the crash on 25 May, telling his followers: "Somebody has to pay." At around 4.20pm, he was behind the wheel of a silver Kia that crashed into the gates near the prime minister's official residence. No injuries were reported and despite the immediate security response, the Metropolitan Police swiftly announced the incident was not being treated as terror-related. When his phone was examined as part of the police investigation it was found to contain three category-A indecent images of children, the most serious type, and five category-C images. Kneller's 15-month prison term was suspended for two years and he must complete rehabilitation programmes. Body found in search for missing mother of two A body has been found in the search for a missing mother of two. Vanessa Ford was reported missing to the Metropolitan Police on Saturday evening. The force has now confirmed British Transport Police (BTP) are investigating a death on the morning of the same day on the tracks in Hackney, northeast London. Officers and paramedics were called to the line close to Dalston Kingsland station at 11.49am following reports of a casualty on the tracks. The person, believed to be a woman in her forties, died at the scene. BTP said the incident is not being treated as suspicious. Although the body is yet to be formally identified, Ms Ford's family has been informed. The mother of two left her home at 11am on Saturday without her phone, wallet and keys, said concerned friends and family who appealed on social media for information on her whereabouts. She was last seen on St Philips Road in Hackney at 11.03am, wearing a dark top and leggings, and likely pink flip flops, according to doorbell camera footage posted online. The Met said that "a number of inquiries were undertaken to locate her". 'Significantly' fewer firearms officers on duty after walkout The capital has "significantly" fewer firearms officers on duty following a walkout by more than 100 staff over the weekend, the Metropolitan Police commissioner has said. Scores of officers stood down from firearms duties on Friday to "consider their position" after one of their colleagues was charged with murder over the death of 24-year-old Chris Kaba in south London. Soldiers had been on standby to help the Met with counterterror policing, but officials said they were no longer needed on Monday after enough officers returned to duty. At the first meeting of the London Policing Board yesterday, Sir Mark Rowley said: "Over the weekend, it had a very significant effect on our capability. We're now in a position where the numbers are strengthening. We can provide credible firearms cover for London, but I must be honest, it's still significantly less than normal which will create some difficult choices." Addressing the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, and a panel of policing experts, Sir Mark said some officers were "extremely anxious", mainly driven by concerns from their families. Brexit boost as EU agrees to discuss delaying electric car tariffs Rishi Sunak's government has been handed a boost after EU officials agreed to discuss post-Brexit plans to apply a tariff on electric cars, ahead of a looming "cliff edge" deadline on whether to delay the move. The UK is hoping the European Commission will agree to push back the costly new tariff rules set to come into force in January 2024 as part of Boris Johnson's Brexit trade deal. British and EU officials will meet in London today and will discuss the tariffs on electric vehicles, with the auto industry also pushing Brussels to delay the rules. The new rules of origin agreed in the Brexit Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) are on the agenda for a summit of the UK-EU trade specialised committee. Brussels has been warned of an "existential threat" posed by new rules of origin which will require carmakers both in Britain and on the continent to build more batteries domestically. Among the final parts of the Brexit deal agreed by Mr Johnson, the changes require 45 per cent of an electric car's value to originate in the UK or EU to qualify for trade without tariffs. Load-Date: September 26, 2023  End of Document
