   Home news in brief The Independent - Daily Edition September 14, 2023 Thursday Second Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Print Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 16 Length: 575 words Body   May backs her Brexit deal over Johnson's Theresa May has said the UK would have been better off under her Brexit deal than the one eventually struck by Boris Johnson. The former Tory PM - booted out over her failure to get a Brexit deal through parliament - has defended her handling of the UK's EU exit as she promotes her new book. Ms May claimed her plan was had some of the benefits of the EU single market - but was blocked in the Commons by "hardline" Brexiteers and Remainers. "It wouldn't have given either side 100 per cent of what they wanted, but it would have given the country a better overall deal," she told BBC's Political Thinking podcast. Ms May said it was a "fallacy" to say her plan amounted to a "hard" Brexit, because she was trying to keep some of the advantages of being inside the single market. The former Tory leader said she "wanted to deliver a Brexit that recognised the concerns of the 48 per cent", adding: "And that was the deal I believe I negotiated." Woman trampled to death by cows A woman was trampled to death by a herd of cows while walking her dog through a field in Wales earlier this month. She was on a public path near the village of Guilsfield in Powys, on Friday 1 September, the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) said. An HSE spokesperson said the cows knocked the woman over as she walked through farmland. It is not yet known if the dog survived. According to the HSE, the woman's family was informed and the coroner notified. Man arrested after girl injured by American xl bully A 60-year-old man has been arrested after a girl was injured by an American xl bully in Birmingham, on Saturday. Ana Paun, 11, suffered shoulder and arm injuries in the attack in Bordesley Green. Two other men were injured in the attack after the dog twice escaped its owner. A West Midlands Police spokesperson said: "A 60-year-old man has been arrested on suspicion of possessing a dog dangerously out of control. He has been bailed with conditions while inquiries continue." The dog remains in secure kennels. In a video posted on TikTok, two men are seen coming to the aid of Ana. A 20-year-old man suffered injuries to his shoulder and forearm. The other also suffered wounds. All were treated in hospital on Saturday. Ana is recovering at home. Motor and building insurance complaints hit five-year high Complaints to the financial ombudsman about motor and buildings insurance have reached a five-year high. The Financial Ombudsman Service (FOS), which released the figures, said that where complaints are being driven by delayed payouts, that is unacceptable. The Association of British Insurers (ABI) said it is concerned by the figures and will work with its members and FOS to understand where improvements can be made. Between April and June 2023, the FOS received 3,869 complaints about car and motorcycle insurance, alongside 1,776 buildings insurance cases. It was the highest combined quarterly total number of new complaints about buildings and motor insurance since April to June 2018. Customers of financial services firms can take complaints to the ombudsman if they cannot reach an agreement with the firm. Just over a third of car and motorcycle insurance-related complaints were upheld in favour of the consumer between April and June, as were four in 10 buildings insurance complaints. The increase appears to be caused by several factors, including complaints about delays on claims payouts, the service said. Load-Date: September 13, 2023  End of Document
