   How is the UK doing after a year without Elizabeth II? CE Noticias Financieras English September 8, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 693 words Body   A year after the death of the UK's longest-serving monarch, the consequences of Brexit, inflation and fracking remain among the country's biggest challenges. When Queen Elizabeth II passed away a year ago, there were several problems in the United Kingdom. Brexit was taking its toll, the cost of living was reaching historic levels and the national union seemed increasingly fractured, with the resurgence of pro-independence intentions in Scotland, for example. A year later, save for the coronation of Charles III, the departure of Liz Truss (who took with the queen the last known photo of the monarch during her lifetime) and the arrival of Rishi Sunak as prime minister, not much has changed. "Although many people remember the queen with appreciation, and King Charles has worked hard this year (more than the queen, according to some media), what worries people most is the so-called 'cost living crisis,' the cost of living crisis, and the feeling that everything is worse after 15 years of conservative rule," explains Oscar Guardiola, a law and international relations analyst at the University of London. Inflation has returned to single digits (close to 7%) this year after reaching levels not seen for more than 40 years in 2022. By the end of the year it is expected to reach 5 %. "There is some positive news for Rishi Sunak in that economic optimism has shown a slight uptick. While 55% believe the economy will get worse next year, 28% expect it to get better, leaving the Ipsos economic optimism index at -27, a 10-point improvement from June," the polling firm estimated last August. But the setbacks give the government no respite, while the Labor party has taken the lead in public opinion by far. According to the same firm, the opposition now has 45 % of voting intentions, compared to 28 % held by Sunak's Conservatives, a gap that has widened over the past year. The most recent setback: the "concrete crisis", as the scandal involving the Prime Minister has been called and which has led to the closure of hundreds of schools for having been built with defective materials and implying potential risks of collapse. Sunak is accused of having reduced the budget for school repairs while he was education minister. The storm came almost at the same time as chaos at airports due to a technical failure affected more than 3,000 flights last week. But while the economy seems to give better prospects, several question marks have been raised by the announcement of the return to the European Union's Horizon scientific collaboration program, or what has been read as the first Brexit reversal. For Guardiola, it remains to be seen "whether the return to the Horizon program implies an acceptance by Her Majesty's government of the increasingly evident failure of Brexit". Which is closely related to another of the challenges that after the queen's death remain: independence aspirations. "The question on everyone's mind is whether the United Kingdom will be maintained during the rule of King Charles III," the analyst notes. He refers to the popularity in Northern Ireland of the Sinn Feinn party, "the political heir of the Irish Liberation Army (IRA)". Guardiola elaborates: "The failure of Brexit and of the conservative unionists has given wings to Irish nationalism. A week ago Monica McWilliams, the only female signatory of the Good Friday Peace Agreement spoke about a constitutional project for an Ireland if not united at least "shared" and federated from London. Scotland would follow suit. Finally, the analyst points to perhaps Charles III's greatest banner: climate action. The first year of the monarch's reign, officially crowned last May 6 (a date by which almost half of the people thought that the monarchy is not important or even that it should be abolished, according to the polls), coincides with the season that has broken all temperature records. At the same time, Europe is facing an unprecedented crisis of fires and floods in countries such as Greece and Spain. The king's green flags seem more relevant than ever, which, according to different analysts, could open an opportunity for him to give relevance to his legacy. Load-Date: September 9, 2023  End of Document
