   How leaving the ECHR has moved from unthinkable to inevitable for the Tories; There is a growing clamour to end the rule of European human rights regulation. Charles Hymas, James Crisp and Gordon Rayner report The Daily Telegraph (London) August 12, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22,23 Length: 3236 words Byline: Charles Hymas, James Crisp ; Gordon Rayner Body   Seven asylum seekers were already in their seats on the first deportation flight to Rwanda as dusk fell on June 14 last year when the European Court of Human Rights made a dramatic intervention. Five hundred miles from the runway at Boscombe Down in Wiltshire, a single judge hearing an appeal behind closed doors in Strasbourg approved an injunction blocking the flight . Almost 14 months later, the Government's flagship policy to stop illegal channel crossings remains grounded, and there is growing panic among Conservative MPs, who believe that deportation flights must begin before next year's general election for their party to have any chance of winning. Standing in the way is Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and there is clamour among backbenchers for Rishi Sunak to remove the UK from the Convention. It is not a policy the Prime Minister has ever championed, having said in the past it is "not necessary", but having staked his reputation on stopping the small boats by making it one of his five pledges to the country, he may well have painted himself into a corner. Article 3 of the ECHR prohibits torture, and the Strasbourg judge ruled that if genuine refugees were sent to Rwanda they could be sent from there back to their home countries and face abuse. The Government says this is not the case, but if the Supreme Court in London sides with Strasbourg when it makes a final ruling on the legality of the deportation flights this autumn, many Tory MPs believe quitting the ECHR, and releasing the UK from its rules, will be the only remaining option for making the Rwanda policy reality. Those on the Right of the party also see it as a political opportunity: as well as throwing red meat to the traditional Tory voters who are crying out for bold Conservative policies, pulling out of the ECHR would force Sir Keir Starmer to take a position on one of the few "wedge" policies dividing the two parties. If he were to say he would reverse a decision to leave the ECHR, he would be seen as weak by many voters, especially those who voted for Brexit in 2016. As The Daily Telegraph reported this week, opinion is hardening not just on the Tory back benches but also in Cabinet, with as many as a third of its ministers ready to contemplate leaving the ECHR. "Opinion in the parliamentary party has hardened considerably, as evidenced by the relative ease of passing the Illegal Migration Act. That is reflected in the Cabinet," says a Cabinet source. "The question is actually who would care enough to oppose given the situation, and it's hard to think who that would be." "  Immigration minister Robert Jenrick refused to rule out the prospect of leaving the ECHR when asked about it on national radio, and little wonder; this week has been the Government's "small boats" week in its summer communications grid, an attempt to show it is having an impact with new policies including a crackdown on "rogue" lawyers, heavierfines for businesses and landlords who turn a blind eye to illegal immigrants, and a new deal with Turkey to combat people smugglers. But, as with the best laid plans, Jenrick's attempts to spread positive news have been thwarted by a series of embarrassments. Thursday was a record daily total for this year - with 750 migrants landing on UK shores. Then yesterday came the humiliating news that the 39 migrants the Government had managed to get on board its 500-bed floating hostel, the Bibby Stockholm, had all been removed after Legionella was found in the water supply. To cap it all, the week ended with the number of migrants crossing the Channel in small boats passing the landmark of 100,000 since the first boat arrived in 2018. The figures. underline the importance of the Rwanda policy because ministers maintain it will be the biggest deterrent to stopping the boats. "We just need one flight to take off for Rwanda, and things will look very different," said one Tory source. The origins of Britain's membership of the ECHR - which is entirely separate from the EU - date back to Europe's determination to build a lasting peace after the Second World War, and the formation in London of the Council of Europe in 1949, which had been championed by Winston Churchill. The ECHR and its Strasbourg-based court are part of the Council of Europe, which now has 46 members including the UK and other non-EU countries such as Turkey and Azerbaijan. The ECHR itself was born from the embryonic "charter of human rights" of which Churchill spoke in May 1948 as a "sincere expression of free democracy". Its fundamental principles are put into effect in UK law via the Human Rights Act. They include the right to a fair trial, right to privacy, freedom from torture, freedom of religion, freedom of expression, freedom from discrimination and freedom from slavery. However, what critics like Richard Ekins, professor of law and constitutional government at Oxford University, lament is that since the 1970s, the Strasbourg court has treated the ECHR as a "living instrument" which he says means it has driven its own vision for social, moral and political reform based on case law. "Most strikingly, the Strasbourg court has invented a whole new European law of immigration and asylum which has no foundation in [its original legal] text," said Prof Ekins, head of the right-of-centre think tank Policy Exchange's Judicial Power Project. As a consequence, every 21stcentury Tory prime minister has threatened at some point to leave the ECHR because of its overbearing influence on the UK's ability to conduct its own affairs as a sovereign state. "We are very clear about what we want, which is British judges making decisions in British courts," said David Cameron, who fought an ECHR ruling giving prisoners the vote which he declared made him feel "physically ill". Prisoner voting rights were never part of the founding charter but simply another example of case law. When Cameron quit No10 in the wake of the Brexit vote, his successor Theresa May took up the baton, after her frustration at the ECHR blocking her attempts as home secretary to deport the radical Islamist cleric Abu Qatada to Jordan. Her Tory leadership campaign included a plan to make leaving the ECHR a future manifesto pledge. She argued the ECHR could "bind the hands of Parliament, adds nothing to our prosperity, makes us less secure by preventing the deportation of dangerous foreign nationals - and does nothing to change the attitudes of governments like Russia's when it comes to human rights". Brexit had also proved that leaving institutions to which the UK seemed inextricably bound was not impossible, making the case for leaving the ECHR more compelling. Boris Johnson declared "all options are on the table" following the ECHR injunction against the first Rwanda flight last year but he, too, found his premiership cut short before he could tackle the issue. Liz Truss had other priorities in her brief 49-day tenure although she did say in the leadership campaign she was "prepared" to pull the UK out of the ECHR. For Sunak, it is said, breaking away from an international convention that Britain played an instrumental part in creating is anathema. One senior MP recalled this week that a Cabinet minister told him Sunak is "allergic" to leaving the ECHR. It is part of the reason ministers have been searching for a Plan B to Rwanda, such as the possibility mooted by Home Office minister Sarah Dines this week of sending illegal migrants to the British Overseas Territory of Ascension Island in the south Atlantic. Labour gleefully pointed out that the number of people crossing the Channel in small boats this week far outnumbered the island's entire population. It remains possible that the Supreme Court will rule in the Government's favour when five of the country's most senior judges begin considering the case in the hearing that starts in October. They must decide whether to uphold the Court of Appeal's verdict from June this year that sending migrants to Rwanda would be an Article 3 breach of their human rights, under the ECHR, because the country is not safe due to the "real" risk they could be sent from there back home - where they could face torture or inhuman www.treatment.No new evidence, assurances or amendments to the policy to prove Rwanda is safe will be accepted. The Supreme Court will only consider whether the law was correctly applied by the appeal court. It is a finely balanced argument that could go either way, evidenced by a 2-1 split between the three appeal court judges in their own decision. If the Government wins, there will be a collective sigh of relief among ministers, but the asylum seekers, charities and their lawyers will likely appeal to Strasbourg and they could apply, again, for an injunction to block the flights until their case was heard. Sunak's Illegal Migration Act gives ministers the power to ignore a temporary injunction as they are not technically part of the ECHR, which would in theory enable flights to take off even if an appeal was launched. If the Government loses in the Supreme Court, it will have no legal avenues left to explore, meaning Sunak will be faced with the inescapable conclusion that exiting the ECHR will be the obvious, and perhaps the only way of making his deportation strategy work before the next election. One Cabinet minister who is a close ally of Sunak concedes: "We've spent a very long time as a party trying to find a place that we can live with the ECHR, and we still want to - but ultimately, if you get to a point between deliverability and not, then I don't think you can totally rule it out." "  The main question, then, will be whether Sunak has the stomach for thefight. As a committed Brexiteer, Sunak might have been expected to be in step with the Right wing of his party over the ECHR, but he has consistently clung to the hope that the Government can achieve its objective of stopping the boats "while remaining party to the ECHR". Part of the problem is that the ECHR underpins several treaties agreed by London and Brussels in the years of tortuous negotiations before Brexit took legal effect on Jan 31 2020. The EU secured British commitments to stay part of the ECHR in talks over the Brexit trade deal. Continued British membership of the ECHR is also the foundation of post-Brexit UK-EU agreements on extradition and judicial cooperation. EU officials warned in October 2021 that plans to curb the ECHR's influence, helmed by former Brexit secretary and then justice secretary Dominic Raab, could lead Brussels to tear up the agreement. Cancelling the trade deal or suspending parts of it could carry a hefty economic impact similar to a no-deal Brexit. It is also part of the Good Friday Agreement, which brought an end to the Troubles in Northern Ireland more than 25 years ago although supporters of leaving the ECHR point out the GFA does not say the UK will never quit the ECHR and that, even outside it, the UK can maintain the spirit and letter of the ECHR. Any move to quit the ECHR could also split the party. While MPs on the Right including the New Conservatives, comprising Red Wall MPs, Common Sense Group and European Research Group will push for leaving, One Nation Tories are ferociously opposed. It is thought those opposed would include Justice Secretary Alex Chalk, an ally of Sunak, and Victoria Prentis, the Attorney General. Former justice secretary Sir Robert Buckland said: "I am afraid we are going down a cul-desac. It is hardly serious politics. Anyone who has read the Rwanda judgment should realise it has nothing to do with Article 3 of the ECHR. It's whether Rwanda is a safe country. That applies in domestic law as well. The ECHR is like a kitemark. It is not germane to the problem." Former Brexit minister David Jones believes there is a staged solution which would throw the ball into Europe's court. "The Government should be making an approach to the Council of Europe for the negotiation of the ECHR. It is not appropriate for the circumstances that we are seeing in the early part of the 21st century," he said. "The Council of Europe might be receptive to such a negotiation but, if they were not, the Government must take steps in domestic legislation to disapply elements of the Convention that are making it impossible to control our own borders." "  When the Prime Minister returns from the Parliamentary summer recess in September - which is being billed as the efective start date for a lengthy general election campaign - he will face a choice. Does he stick to his belief that it is in the UK's economic interest to have good relations with the EU, a policy which voters will find indistinguishable from Labour's position? Or does the need to win votes from the Tory base, satisfy Eurosceptics and Leave voters and put clear water between the Tories and Labour, trump such economic concerns? Most MPs agree a commitment to leave would require a referendum but, say supporters, a pledge to do so could reconvene the Brexit alliance of voters that delivered the 2019 majority. Support for the Rwanda policy among the public stands at 46 per cent in favour, 27 per cent against. Sir Keir Starmer remains a weakness rather than a strength for Labour, and if Sunak goes for broke and forces his opponent to denounce leaving the ECHR, the former human rights barrister might be seen in the public's minds as one of the "lefty lawyers" preventing illegal migrants from being deported. That might be one of the few issues that could yet move the dial in the election campaign, which is what makes it so attractive. Other major issues in the election, such as the cost of living crisis, the economy as a whole, the NHS and Ukraine are likely to descend into a war of platitudes between the two parties, who have little room for manoeuvre on taxation or welfare because of the tight economic situation the country is in. The risk for the Conservatives is that they will struggle to answer the question of what they have achieved in what will be 14 years in power, other than Brexit, which now seems a long time ago. Voters are swayed by what parties promise to do in the future, not what they have done in the past, so Sunak needs attention-grabbing policies that will set him apart from Labour. "Keep the boats or leave the ECHR," said one Tory MP, foreshadowing what might be the beginnings of a campaign poster. Vote Leave strategist Dominic Cummings might have put it another way - Take Back Control. To borrow from another successful Tory slogan, Sunak knows that if he is serious about trying to win in 2024, he must find away to Get Rwanda Done. SIX CONTROVERSIAL RULINGS AGAINST UK 1 STEEL & MORRIS V UNITED KINGDOM, 1997 The court rules that environmental activists Helen Steel and David Morris had been denied a fair trial (Article 6) and been denied freedom of expression (Article 10) in the course of the successful 10-year libel case against them by McDonald's. The British documentary film McLibel was made about the case. 2 HIRST V UNITED KINGDOM, 2005 Britain was found to be in breach of Article 3 (freedom from torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment) because it did not allow prisoners the vote. The ruling has never been implemented, with then leader of the opposition David Cameron saying the prospect made him feel "physically ill". 3 AL JEDDA V UNITED KINGDOM, 2011 The court found that Britain had denied the right to liberty (Article 5) to a dual British-Iraqi citizen when the British Army detained him indefinitely in a facility it operated in Basra, Iraq. It established that the convention applies anywhere in the world where signatories are in control. 4 OTHMAN (ABU QATADA) V UNITED KINGDOM, 2012 The court rules that Abu Qatada, a radical Islamic cleric, could not be lawfully deported to Jordan because the country could use evidence obtained through torture in proceedings against him. He was eventually deported in 2013 after Jordan said it would not use the evidence. 5 VINTER AND OTHERS V UNITED KINGDOM, 2013 Denying prisoners serving life sentences any prospect of release or review was found to be a violation of Article 3 (freedom from torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment). This was later reversed in January 2017 in Hutchinson v United Kingdom. 6 K.N. V UNITED KINGDOM, 2022 The inaugural deportation of asylum seekers to Rwanda was blocked 90 minutes before take-of f when the court ruled a 54-year-old Iraqi had not been treated with due process. Lawyers for the six other prospective deportees then used the ruling to prevent their own clients being removed. 75 years of intervention How the Eurocratic body has evolved and affects us today 1948 ThepCongresspofpEurope,papmeetingpofp Europeanpnationsponppost-warp reconstruction,phearspcallspforpaplegallyp enforceablephumanprightspcharter.pKeyp supporterpWinstonpChurchill,pright,psays:p "Inpthepcentrepofpourpmovementpstandspthep ideapofpapcharterpofphumanprights,pguardedp bypfreedompandpsustainedpbyplaw."p 1951 Britainpbecomespthepfirstp countryptopratifypthepEuropeanp ConventionponpHumanpRights,p whichpintroducesp18particlespofp humanprightsprangingpfrompthep rightptoplifepandpfreep expression,ptopprivacypandp freedompofpassociation. 1959 ThepEuropeanpCourtpofpHumanp Rightspispestablishedpinp Strasbourg,pFrance,ptopupholdp thepEuropeanpConventionponp HumanpRights.p 1968 Thepcourtpfoundpitspfirstp violationpofpthepconventionpinp NeumeisterpvpAustria,prulingp thatpapmanpwhopwaspheldponp remandpforpaptotalpofptwopyears,fourpmonthspandp20pdaysphadp beenpdeprivedpofphisplibertypinp contraventionpofpArticlep5.p 1999-2000 Thepnumberpofpjudgmentsp deliveredpbypthepcourtpstartsptop increaseprapidly.pBetweenp 1959pandp1998,p837pwerep given,pwhereasp872pmadepinp 1999pandp2000palone.p 2015 DavidpCameronptellspthep Commonsphepwouldpnotprulep outpleavingpthepECHRptop overcomepoppositionptop attemptedpreformpofpthep Labour-erapHumanpRightspAct. 2022 April 14: Boris Johnson announces a plan to deport migrants arriving in small boats to Rwanda. He says this would act as a "very considerable deterrent". May 15: Johnson says 50 migrants will soon be deported, with those selected for the flight given seven to 14 days to lodge objections. June 11: UK High Court rules the flight legal, with judge Mr Justice Swift declaring there was a "material public interest" in home secretary Priti Patel being able to carry out her policies. June 14: At 7.30pm, with migrants already on board the plane, the first deportation flight is cancelled minutes before take-of following a ruling by a judge at the ECHR in Strasbourg. December 19: The UK High Court again rules the Government's Rwanda policy is lawful December 31: Some 45,755 migrants made the Channel crossing over the course of the year, according to government figures. 2023 April 24: The Court of Appeal reconsiders if it is safe to send asylum seekers to Rwanda. June 29: The Rwanda deal is ruled unlawful by the Court of Appeal, which rules deportations breach Article 3 of the ECHR, "with which...the Government must comply." July 13: The Government is given leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, with a ruling expected in the autumn, which could finally sink the Rwanda policy. 'We just need one flight to take off for Rwanda, and things will look very different' Tory source 'Elements of the Convention make it impossible to control our own borders' Ex-minister David Jones Graphic    COM BILLIONPHOTOS. Load-Date: October 31, 2023  End of Document
