   Hunt's pick for rate-setting panel is Democrat who criticised Brexit The Sunday Telegraph (London) June 18, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 544 words Byline: Edward Malnick Body   THE newest member of the Bank of England's rate-setting panel admitted that she is a registered Democrat voter in the US, as she refused to recant a "hyperbolic" claim she made about the impact of Brexit. Facing questions from MPs, Megan Greene, who was nominated by Jeremy Hunt to join the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), said she had been aligned with the Republican Party but has switched to the Democrats. Senior figures in the US political party have repeatedly criticised the Conservatives' approach to issues such as Brexit in recent years. The disclosure prompted further consternation among senior Tories after it emerged last week that Ms Greene wanted the bank to create "preferential" interest rates to help speed up the push for net zero. Last week, Ms Greene, the global chief of Kroll, an American risk man agement firm, faced questions from the Treasury select committee, which vets MPC nominees before they take up their post. In response to a series of questions from Harriet Baldwin, the Conservative chairman of the committee, Ms Greene separately declined the opportunity to admit that she was wrong to claim in a 2016 tweet that the Brexit vote was "the most damaging blow ever inflicted on the liberal democratic international order". Asked repeatedly whether she still held that view, she eventually said: "Brexit has been a headwind for the UK economy. That plays out in the data." In an article published before her nomination, Ms Greene warned that central banks needed to "go further" to help combat climate change and said that the BoE should introduce a system of "dual interest rates" to "give banks preferential (negative) rates if they direct funds toward green investments." The remarks sparked alarm and Ms Greene was questioned by Dame Andrea Leadsom about the piece when she appeared before the Treasury committee that went on to approve her appointment. She responded: "I want to be clear that I wrote that commentary over a year ago in a very different capacity - as a thought leader - trying to figure out how to mobilise private capital to encourage the green transition, which most developed economies have not achieved yet. That was the capacity in which I wrote that. It is the Government's job to set the remit for the Bank of England, and so, as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee, it is really not up to me what the remit is." However, a copy of the questionnaire submitted to the committee by Ms Greene on May 25 reveals that she listed the article in response to the question: "Which of your articles, papers or other publications are of most relevance to your future role as an external MPC member?" In response to questions from Ms Baldwin about her political affiliations, Ms Greene said: "I have been a member of a political party in the US." Ms Baldwin asked the economist to clarify "which one"? Ms Greene added: "I am registered to vote as a Democrat ... it is totally irrelevant to what I do as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee." Last week an Ipsos survey found public confidence in the Bank of England's ability to control inflation had fallen to a record low, with 34 per cent of respondents dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with the way it was setting interest rates. Editorial Comment: Page 17 Graphic    Megan Greene said in 2016 that the UK's Leave vote was 'the most damaging blow ever inflicted on the liberal democratic world order' Load-Date: June 18, 2023  End of Document
