   I really wish I'd voted Remain, says Italy 'nomad' i-news August 15, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 15 Length: 344 words Byline: Silvia Marchetti Body   She used to visit Italy seven times a year, staying for months at a time and returning home with bags of Italian produce that she sold on to friends and relatives. Now Ruth*, 68, a pensioner from Manchester, says that her nomadic lifestyle and small business have been mostly destroyed by the "abominable travel restrictions" introduced after Brexit. Ruth, who voted Leave, believes that she was lied to and regrets her decision. "I feel trapped, it's a nightmare. Why didn't our politicians clearly tell us everything was going to change and our Italian dream-like expat life would be shattered?" she asked. "I was fed a lie about Brexit." "I rented for just Euro 500 (£430) a month this lovely seaside cottage near Terracina, south of Rome. I'd come and go as I pleased, staying for weeks, and buying local foods to take back to the UK. Now I have to keep calendar alerts to avoid being fined for overstays." Under the post-Brexit travel rules, Britons cannot stay in the EU for more than 90 days in every 180 and Ruth is only allowed to bring back food for personal use. Ruth retired 10 years ago and chose the coastal area south of Rome for its less crowded beaches, natural reserves and affordable lifestyle. The two-bedroom cottage she still rents, albeit only for the summer months now, has a terrace and private access to the rocky shore. "It's my Eden, which unfortunately I get to enjoy much less," she said. "Before, I would come here even for Christmas, or a long weekend. Now all that has changed. I regret voting for Brexit. If only I could vote again to Remain, this time I would really know what it would entail." Ruth used to take home local produce such mozzarella and fresh buffalo milk ricotta to sell. She never sold huge amounts but began getting orders from people she knew and established a small business in Manchester. "Before Brexit I could ship a few boxes of these foods back to the UK, or take them along with me as plane luggage," she said. "Now I can only take home dairy products, fruits and vegetables for personal use." *Name has been changed Load-Date: August 15, 2023  End of Document
