   Is 'steady-handed' UK caught in post-Brexit doom loop? Opinion; Richard Curran considers whether we can trace higher UK interest rates back to the EU membership referendum Business Telegraph July 11, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland) All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 269 words Byline: Richard Curran Body   F EARS of higher interest rates in the UK and the US pushed up bond yields during the week. Whatever about two-year US Treasury notes hitting their highest level since 2007, the situation for the UK now looks a lot worse. There, the cost of two-year money hit its highest level since 1998, while five-year money was more expensive than it's been since 2007. This has been achieved without Liz Truss or Kwasi Kwarteng, but under the supposedly steady hand of Chancellor Jeremy Hunt and Prime Minister Rishi Sunak. The UK looks caught in a post-Brexit doom loop. In fact, two-year borrowing costs for the UK are higher than for Italy or Greece. Investors are betting that UK interest rates will go all the way to 6.5% by March next year, which would be the highest rate since 1998. The problem is that expectations of higher interest rates is souring investor sentiment towards the UK. Inflation is not yet under control and sterling has weakened in recent weeks. Borrowing costs for Sunak will get higher, thereby reducing his ability to borrow his way through some post-Brexit problems. Brexit will get the blame from some quarters, while others will say nothing at all. Even opposition leader Keir Starmer isn't talking returning to the EU any time soon. There are two reasons for this. Firstly, it would take years to deliver, even if a decision was made in principle. Secondly, Brexit wasn't just a government policy; it was the result of a people's referendum. It's one thing to say the previous government were idiots, but the majority of the population? Not good politics. Richard Curran is a journalist for Mediahuis Ireland Load-Date: July 11, 2023  End of Document
