   It feels like no one is in control any more; Post-Brexit trade deals and even El Nino events are affecting UK agriculture, says farmer Ro Collingborn Western Daily Press July 22, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 27 Length: 926 words Byline: Ro Collingborn Body   THE dreaded Australian trade deal has been running since June 1, with imports quadrupling compared to a year before. Meat and Livestock Australia are predicting their beef production will have a near 40% increase in the next few years to 2025. They are targeting the UK market with prime cuts. After a good couple of years, UK beef prices are now falling, and this is being put down to poor European demand. Market penetration from Australia isn't going to help us, and is it coincidence that prices started to fall at the same time as Australian imports started? Ireland was previously the UK's biggest importer and they are extremely worried about increased competition from Australia. We have to thank Boris Johnson and Liz Truss for this slap in the face to British producers. One wonders if British exports to Australia have had anything like the same effect - if there are any. It's thanks to Brexit that we have such deals. Brexit led to Boris and Truss frantically searching for international trade to fill the huge gap left when we voluntarily and madly separated ourselves from Europe. Previous promises to farmers for a level playing field and protection for our animal welfare standards went out of the window in the scrabble to get at least one new trade deal. Enthusiasm for Brexit has diminished as we experience what it means in practice. I kept the communications from both sides and it's interesting to look back on them now. Vote Leave made much of the fact that unless we leave the EU "immigration will continue to be out of control" and also that there would be an extra £350 million per week to spend on the NHS. Nigel Lawson, a prominent Brexiteer promised: "Outside the EU, we would prosper, we would be free, and we would stand tall." As a UK citizen, it seems as if nobody is really in control any more. Great Britain doesn't feel so great, or the UK so united. Our political system has been dented and confidence lost. Immigration is certainly out of control. The result of the 2016 referendum that caused all this chaos was 48% to 52% in favour of leave, and it was a result that David Cameron wasn't expecting and no one had actually prepared for. Covid didn't help but seven years later, the position has changed with two polls showing 52% and 53% in favour of Remain. It's certainly true that immigration has rocketed since Brexit. The small boats daily crossing the Channel have shown that we don't have control of our borders. Net immigration is now at an all-time high. At the time of the 2019 election, net migration figures stood at 226,000, in 2022 the figure had risen to 606,000. Housing asylum seekers in hotels is said to cost £5.6 million a day. When asylum is denied, very few immigrants are returned. It's a problem for any government when so many people are fleeing from persecution and extreme poverty, that they will take any means they can to find a more hopeful future elsewhere. Adverse trade deals following Brexit are one way that UK agriculture can be affected, the other is the recent El Nino. An El Nino event is when the waters warm in the tropical eastern and central ocean (la Nina is the opposite when they cool) and there is universal impact. It's thought that the Second World War was decided by such an event when, in 1942-43 Hitler invaded Russia and met with such low temperatures that much of Germany's army perished. The current El Nino has just begun and it will mean lower rainfall in the Western Pacific and Southern Africa. In the United States there is likely to be increased rainfall in the southern States and Mexico. Food supply lines can be affected by catastrophic droughts and flooding; it can also cause very cold winters in countries such as Russia. In Peru, sea temperatures are already two degrees above normal and there is less food available for fish as the trade winds slow. Scientists believe that climate change will make the impact of El Nino worse and add to the extremity of events. El Nino may mean that the average temperature may temporarily rise above the crucial 1.5 degrees Celsius since pre-industrial times. Scientists say that it's the line in the sand that we don't want to cross, as we might then experience irreversible effects. Record-breaking temperatures are already being seen. It's not the best time to be going on holiday to Europe, for example, unless you enjoy 40C. Agriculture is affected by the weather, almost more than anything besides disease. With warmer and wetter climates coming our way, diseases will also flourish with harmful pests like the diamondback moth, which eats brassicas, finding it easier to cross the Channel and extend their range northwards. We have just had two very wet winters and two summers of drought; both these create a strain on available food for animals. A sensible response to combat El Nino for livestock farmers would be to build up a good stock of fodder. Ironically, farmers in the past always tried to have a spare rick of hay for emergencies. From a government viewpoint, it seems to me that we should be trying to make our country as self-sufficient in food as possible, rather than relying on imports from countries which will also be adversely affected by weather events like the current El Nino. When there is a food shortage, governments need to feed their own populations first. ¦ Ro Collingborn is a Wiltshire dairy farmer and has been dairy chairman of the Women's Food and Farming Union, on the Milk Development Council, the Veterinary Products Committee, the RSPCA Council and a Wiltshire Wildlife Trust director. Graphic    >>After a good couple of years, UK beef prices are now falling, says Ro Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
