   It was daft to leave the EU, but don't romanticise rejoining The Sunday Times (London) August 20, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS AND MONEY;BUSINESS; Pg. 7 Length: 1402 words Byline: David Smith Body   When, a week ago, I wrote about the UK's growth problem, underlined by GDP (gross domestic product) per head being lower than in late 2021, I said there was no obvious short-term fix. This met with a big response ? on Twitter/X/or whatever it is called this weekend, in emails, online and elsewhere. Overwhelmingly, commenters said the way to fix the problem was to rejoin the European Union, or, failing that, the single market and customs union. I try to deal with what is practical and possible, but let me this week address this. The rejoiners were chiming with public opinion. Surveys on the decision to leave the EU, monitored by the polling expert Professor Sir John Curtice on the What UK Thinks website, on average show 60 per cent believe leaving was wrong, against 40 per cent who still think it was right. Curtice's latest poll of polls on how people would vote now shows 59 per cent support for rejoining the EU, 41 per cent for staying out. People think that leaving has been bad for the economy, exacerbating the cost of living crisis and making it harder to sell goods abroad. The evidence is on their side. The post-financial crisis recovery in business investment was snuffed out by the referendum and has only just risen above its spring 2016 level. Leaving the single market has hurt exporters, as every survey reflects. The figures for the second quarter of this year show the volume of exports of goods and services down 11 per cent compared with the final quarter of 2019, the eve of Brexit. Both exports and imports are suffering. The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), in assumptions last reviewed in April, expects that in the long run, both will be 15 per cent lower than if the UK had remained in the EU. So far, imports, which in the second quarter were marginally higher than in late 2019, are holding up better. The OBR is sticking to its assumption that leaving will reduce UK long-run productivity by 4 per cent. On the cost of living crisis, detailed work by the London School of Economics' Centre for Economic Performance, updated in May, shows that of the 25-percentage point rise in UK food prices between December 2019 and March this year, eight percentage points  just under a third  was due to Brexit. Trade frictions, mainly non-tariff barriers, made food more expensive. Bringing all these effects together in a so-called doppelganger model  comparing UK performance with what it would have been had we not left  John Springford, deputy director of the Centre for European Reform (CER), estimates that last year the UK economy was more than 5 per cent smaller than if had there not been a vote to leave. His research has had a baptism of fire  challenged by other economists  but has come through it well. For those who think the effect is smaller, or larger, the 95 per cent confidence range for the negative effect is 3 to 6.7 per cent. The usual response to this is that the UK has done fine relative to other big EU economies since the referendum. But the EU, the eurozone and France have significantly outgrown the UK since then, reversing the pre-2016 position. And the growth record relative to Germany and Italy, particularly on a per capita basis, has deteriorated. It is not just about numbers. Apart from being divisive, Brexit has had a disastrous effect on politics, trust in politicians and competence in government. Political talent was lost because it was on the wrong side of the divide. Without Brexit, we would never have had a Boris Johnson, Liz Truss or, for that matter, a Theresa May or Rishi Sunak government ? though it may be unfair to tar them with the same brush. In the case of Sunak, however, we still have government by slogan. After recent experience, businesses regard the Conservative Party with deep suspicion. So why not just rejoin? The first barrier is political. The Tories, given their membership, are not going to advocate rejoining; they would have to undergo a revolution. Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, had his fingers burnt when shadow Brexit secretary and does not want to touch it with a barge pole. Those polling figures would need to be 80 per cent to force a change of view. Labour would try to improve on the thin and unsatisfactory border-in-the-Irish Sea trade deal negotiated by Johnson. Sunak has also tried to improve on it with his Windsor Framework,but had little thanks from Ulster's unionists. Even if politics shifted, there would have to be the psychodrama of another referendum. We discovered in 2016 that this is a very bad way of deciding a complex issue such as EU membership. Many voted on the false prospectus that the UK could exit and remain in the single market and customs union, others that it would mean net migration dropping into the low tens of thousands.Net migration last year was more than 600,000, nearly double the 330,000 figure for 2015 that helped swing the Brexit vote. Economists do not think this a bad thing. The UK now has a bureaucratic but liberal migration regime, though the small-boats fiasco shows anything but taking back control. Were there to be another referendum, people would again be voting on a leap into the unknown. Membership terms on re-entering would be very different to those the UK once had. The prodigal son would have to pay a penance, losing the opt-out from euro membership and, according to the CER's Springford, would also probably be required to be part of the Schengen zone. Leaving and then rejoining would do nothing for a reputation already hurt by Brexit. To avoid Britain becoming an inout country, the EU would be seeking ways to lock in membership. Some would say this is a price worth paying for undoing the damage. But, by the time it could happen, if it could happen, the economy and business will have adjusted to Brexit, even if at a lower growth rate. The EU is moving on, as are companies. There are few if any business plans conditioned on re-entry. Not only that but, while leaving was a huge policy error, we should not pretend all our problems derive from it. Low investment was an issue long before 2016. An Office for National Statistics study, covering 1997-2017, put the UK bottom of a table of more than 30 OECD countries for public and private investment as a percentage of GDP. Low UK business investment (10 per cent of GDP, against a 14 per cent average for competitor economies) is longstanding. The productivity stagnation behind the abject living standards of recent years has been made worse by Brexit but began before 2016, starting around the time of the 2008-09 financial crisis. And so on. If, after the tortuous process of rejoining, or negotiating a new single market arrangement, we expected to wake up in a land of milk and honey, we might find the milk is sour and the honey not that sweet. Our problems, which are considerable, are ours to solve. If we could time travel back to 2016, it would help, but that is impossible. We have to deal with the possible. PS I was spoilt for choice in what else to write about. It could have been GERS (government expenditure and revenue Scotland): the annual Scottish government figures showing that, despite a boost to North Sea revenues from high energy prices, Scotland ran a budget deficit of 9 per cent of GDP in 2022-23, compared with 5.2 per cent for the UK as a whole. But the independence debate has gone quiet, so I shall leave it. Closer to home, I had to renew my car insurance ? and keeping a Lamborghini on the road is not cheap (joking). My renewal quote on what Top Gear used to call a reasonably priced car was an increase of 38 per cent. With the help of the comparison sites, I managed to get it down below 32 per cent. It is still a huge rise and I am not alone. The average increase over the past 12 months, in the consumer prices index (CPI), is a massive 49.5 per cent. These huge hikes are perhaps the most worrying kind of inflation. They are part of the acceleration in service sector inflation, now running at 7.4 per cent. People who say inflation is due to international factors should look at this. Insurers are trying to claw back profits ? having, according to an EY analysis, paid out £1.10 last year in claims and costs for every £1 in premiums. Customers are paying, and rising premiums are helping push the Bank of England towards more interest rate rises. Not good. david.smith@sunday-times.co.uk To re-enter, the prodigal son would have to pay a penance Load-Date: August 20, 2023  End of Document
