   Johnson and Gove did get Brexit done badly - but what did people expect? The Courier July 3, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 740 words Byline: Helen Brown Body   o, it's been seven years since Brexit. S Or at least, since the vote for Brexit, which is not the same thing at all. The recent notable anniversary - wool (as in pulling over), if you go for wedding symbolism in what was essentially a bitter divorce - set me pondering where we are now. I was one of the happy-clappy hopefuls who didn't want Brexit but thought that with a bit of common sense and goodwill, we might just make some kind of go of it. Going well, that… And that is what has struck me most. Sure, the vote was won on the back of lies, personal ambition and corruption that I hope I do not live to see again at the centre of public life in my country. But it was also a symbol of something, if not exactly rotten in the existing state of Britain, then certainly rotting and in need of a form of expression hitherto unavailable to those who felt they were not being heard. What seems to be the beef now is that Brexit has failed because it hasn't been done properly. Now, I absolutely understand why some people voted for it. I do. When your status quo is pretty hellish, why would you vote to keep things the same? Though in many cases now they have ended up with something worse. By those lights, many leave voters have a perfect right to feel aggrieved. What I cannot understand - and doubt I ever will - is why anyone thought that those at the head of the campaign were the ones to do the thing properly and give them what they wanted. Even back then, most of us didn't need a privileges committee to tell us they were a bunch of self-serving, mendacious clowns. Why would you think they would suddenly turn into the kind of people who could make a silk purse out of a sow's ear? I wouldn't even have minded so much if it had been an acceptable, working sow's ear. Instead, it was a bit like employing tradesmen you don't know, with no track record, to tinker with your fascias, soffits and rones and then come over all shocked when the roof falls in. What rabid Brexiteer politicians don't seem to understand is that remain voters didn't want any of this either. It gives me no pleasure at all to find everyone - and for once, we're all in this together - in this position. Because "I told you so" leaves as bitter a taste in the mouths of those who utter it as it poisons the ears of those who hear it. Even if they're choosing not to listen. One perhaps should not find any sort of grim amusement in the continuing horror that is the Russian invasion of Ukraine. There's been too much pain, suffering and destruction and, of course, it's far from finished yet. But just occasionally, a glimpse of black humour keeks out of even the darkest of deeds. The coup that never was is the latest madness out of Moscow, with the result a withdrawal of the Wagner group, its leader Mr Prigozhin lurking in Belarus waiting, no doubt, for the sword of Damocles to come down on his traitorous bonce, and the horrible Mr Putin claiming a kind of victory. What did give rise to a wry smile, however, was the discovery that after an early spell in chokey, Mr Prigozhin began selling hot dogs from a street van, working his way up to providing school meals, provisioning the military and eventually, catering high-end international events at the Kremlin. Obviously even a mercenary army still marches on its stomach, especially after its boss has personal experience of porridge. Couldn't happen here, of course, where most would-be politicos could not run a drinking session in a brewery, let alone provide the canapes. Good thing Boris Johnson didn't know about him when he was throwing his various shindigs at Chequers and No 10 or we might be having even more interesting discussions about Partygate at the sharp end of a Kalashnikov or a dodgy petit four. Ah, but don't count your chickens, however they are presented by your chef of choice. It was revealed recently that no less an upright figure than Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer, as a student, was once lifted for selling illegal ice creams down the Cote D'Azur. Trust our Keir to be caught bonny on the Riviera rather than Blackpool prom. Mr Whippy he ain't but given the number of scandals and improprieties continuing to crawl out of the woodwork around the party opposite, perhaps he leaves that title to those on the government benches. Unless he has plans to hobble Rishi Sunak by sending Angela Rayner round with a tray of doctored Magnums… We didn't need a committee to tell us they were clowns Graphic    TEAM: Gove's expression seems to foretell the disaster ahead while Johnson's suggests he is blissfully unaware of what transpired. Load-Date: July 3, 2023  End of Document
