   Kemi aims for a blockbuster South Korean trade upgrade Sunday Express September 24, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 365 words Byline: David Maddox Body   TRADE Secretary Kemi Badenoch has opened talks for an upgraded trade deal with South Korea in a new boost for Brexit Britain. Ms Badenoch has been talking to counterparts in Seoul who hailed Brexit as a major opportunity for the UK. It comes as South Korea politicians revealed their decision to join the growing Comprehensive and Progressive Trans Pacific Partnership trade bloc was inspired by Britain becoming a member. South Korean Senator Choi Seung-Jae told the Sunday Express Brexit has provided both countries with an exciting opportunity. He said: "Relations between Britain and South Korea have always been strong. But with Brexit there is an opportunity for us to build not just business links but also cultural ties in many areas." A UK government source said work is now underway to upgrade the free trade agreement which was rolled over from Britain's EU membership.The source said: "We want to upgrade it.We've consulted businesses on their priorities and want to launch negotiations as soon as possible this year." After the global chip shortage and other issues caused by Covid, the UK and South Korea signed an agreement to strengthen supply chain resilience and smooth the flow of key products. A source close to Ms Badenoch added: "The UK wants the CPTPP to grow and is pleased countries like South Korea see our application as a source of inspiration." The new deal would build on trade between the two countries worth £17.1billion in the year up to March 31.This included £9.4billion in exports from the UK. South Korea has one of the more dynamic economies in Asia, with growth of 2.9 per cent despite the global economic downturn. It is the UK's 23rd largest trading partner. But there is a belief that the UK has an opportunity to expand its 1.6 per cent share of the South Korean market significantly. The top five UK exports to South Korea are crude oil, cars, pharma products, generators and clothing. South Korea sells the UK cars, ships, refined oil and telecoms. Tory MP Adam Afriyie said: "When you come to countries such as South Korea and see the enthusiasm to build stronger trade relations with Britain, it shows that Brexit opened up opportunities we need to grasp." Graphic    POSITIVE: Adam Afriyie MP and Trade Secretary Kemi Badenoch Load-Date: September 24, 2023  End of Document
