   King's visit will require gracious diplomacy in the wake of Brexit Irish Independent July 11, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 756 words Byline: JOHN DOWNING Body   It's a fair bet that Charles Windsor will have a go at the "cúpla focal" when he makes his first official visit to the Republic of Ireland as the reigning British monarch in the coming weeks. But King Charles's first formal visit here plays to a very different dynamic in British-Irish relations than when his late mother, Queen Elizabeth II, wowed the nation on her groundbreaking visit in May 2011. The late queen's symbolic efforts to signal real reconciliation, including those welcome words of Irish, warmed hearts across the land. But her son will need all his gracious diplomacy - and some more - to effect a shift in a relationship between London and Dublin, which has been around a dangerous corner for the past seven years. Brexit and all its unpleasant fallout, compounded by the mendacious behaviour of Boris Johnson and other Tories, has taken a large toll. In his many years as Prince Charles, he made remarkable efforts to cope with his justified sense of fury and dark desolation over the IRA murder of "the grandfather I never had", Louis Mountbatten, in Sligo back in 1979. These efforts have been widely acknowledged for quite some time. He literally extended the hand of friendship and reconciliation to Republican leaders, Gerry Adams and the late Martin McGuinness, both of whom were undoubtedly close to key IRA leaders at the time of the appalling slaughter of Mountbatten and those in his company. In the aftermath of the IRA killing of the granduncle and mentor to Charles, who was murdered along with three others in a massive bomb attack at Mullaghmore in August 1979, Sinn Féin's propaganda sheet An Phoblacht struck a vicious tone in vaunting the slaughter. The paper stated: "We will tear out their sentimental imperialist heart. The execution was a way of bringing home to the English ruling class, and its working-class slaves, that their government's war on us is going to cost them as well." Happily, the work of many people in these islands, in the European Union, and in the US, helped effect great change for the better. It was notable that a few months ago, Sinn Féin's Michelle O'Neill felt comfortable enough with her own members to attend King Charles's coronation in London. Looking back, Charles worked hard to build on the breakthrough visit by his mother in May, 2011. In 2015, he met with Adams at NUI Galway during what was a symbolically loaded visit to both the Northern and Republic jurisdictions in Ireland. The next day, Charles and his wife, Camilla, visited the scene of the IRA murders in Sligo. The emphasis was on reconciliation throughout, and he embarked on a vow to visit all 32 Irish counties, something many Irish people never do. But on this upcoming visit, which is likely to be in September, the new British king has another task which is very challenging in a new and subtle way. The Brexit referendum of 2016 produced a result which the Irish Government accepted as the will of the British people. Far less acceptable was the conduct of that referendum campaign. There followed a total absence of any kind of consideration for the fallout for the island of Ireland, and the implications for the hard-won 1998 Good FridayAgreement which delivered a fragile, precious peace. The UK prime minister, Theresa May, then made all this worse by opting for the hardest possible manifestation of Brexit in ensuing divorce discussions. All of that was compounded by May's own party's appalling disloyalty to her. Attempts were subsequently made by Ireland to help broker a UK-EU compromise, notably in a meeting in late 2019 between UK prime minister Boris Johnson and Taoiseach Leo Varadkar at the Wirral in England. This led to an EU-UK exit deal which was vaunted by Johnson while the role of the Taoiseach was saluted by European leaders. Then Johnson went on to repudiate the deal he had negotiated. The outlook deteriorated further thereafter. For Dublin and Ireland generally, it has all been very hard to take. But big country-small country relations carry a need for realism, especially for the smaller party. There is no doubt that the Irish side wants to improve relations, but trust is in short supply and doubt persists about how genuine the current London government may be about keeping to the latest Brexit compromises. This is where King Charles could have a positive role to play. As monarch, he is precluded from politics as such. But his mother, and he himself, have shown that they can exert a deal of influence and help markedly improve the tone of relations in difficult times. Graphic    Britain's King Charles takes a stroll with his wife, Queen Camilla, along Derrynane beach, Co Kerry, during a visit here in 2018. He is expected to make his first state visit here as king in September. Photo: Frank McGrath Load-Date: July 11, 2023  End of Document
