   Labour MPs fear Starmer caution will hand SNP by-election win; Leader's socially conservative stance targets English voters and risks putting off Scots Financial Times (London, England) August 24, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 952 words Byline: JIM PICKARD; LUKANYO MNYANDA Body   Labour MPs have warned that Sir Keir Starmer's cautious social policies and stance on Brexit could leave the party outflanked by the Scottish National party in an imminent by-election. The upcoming contest in Rutherglen and Hamilton West, expected in October, is viewed by Labour as an opportunity to seize political momentum north of the border ahead of a general election expected next year. The SNP is just 2 points ahead of Labour in polling for Scottish seats in the general election, according to Survation, down from a 14-point lead in January, after the party was rocked by a financing scandal and widening internal divisions. One Labour official said the byelection would be "tough" but added: "We do have the momentum going into the race, a good candidate, and we are confident in our strategy." But the by-election will test Starmer's strategy of taking a socially conservative line on issues such as immigration, welfare and crime - aimed at winning back voters in England - which some Labour MPs fear will put off more liberalminded Scottish voters. MPs also fear the party's commitment not to reverse Brexit could alienate sections of the electorate, which in the 2016 referendum voted overwhelmingly against leaving the EU. Losing to the SNP, which is mired in a financing scandal and internal divisions, would cast serious doubt on Labour's revival in Scotland and its chances of securing a national majority at a general election. "I understand it's a dilemma for the leadership," said Clive Lewis, a prominent leftwing Labour MP. "But I have colleagues in the Scottish Labour party, MSPs, who are disappointed with the lack of ambition ... our current policies will be difficult for Labour to sell in Scotland." A shadow minister said: "This cautious strategy is going to be severely tested ... the SNP will barrack us from the left." Another noted that policies designed to win back the "Red Wall" - former Labour heartlands in England - would not necessarily be popular among Scots. "The more we tack to the right to win back places like Grimsby and Rother Valley, the more there's a chance that we turn off socially liberal voters in Scotland," she said. Until 2015, Labour had more than 40 MPs in Scotland. It lost all but one in the wake of the 2014 independence referendum, which galvanised supporters of leaving the 316-year union with England under the SNP's banner. Once Scotland's dominant political force, the Labour party was left fighting for survival in 2019 when it lost six of its seven seats. Winning over Scottish voters could prove a turning point in unlocking victory at the national level, as it has been in the past for Labour. Ahead of the by-election, triggered after then SNP MP Margaret Ferrier was suspended from parliament for breaking Covid-19 regulations, the SNP has made clear it intends to outmanoeuvre Labour from the left. The SNP claims that Starmer's position on social issues and Brexit is indistinguishable from the Conservatives. Last month, Starmer was criticised by the SNP and unions for saying he would not scrap a government cap on welfare payments for children should Labour win. He has also ruled out rejoining the EU single market or customs union. This point was echoed by SNP Westminster leader Stephen Flynn during a campaign event this month with Katy Loudon, the party's candidate for Rutherglen and Hamilton West. Flynn accused Labour of taking Scots for granted while Loudon vowed to oppose "cruel Tory welfare cuts". Flynn also attacked what he called Starmer's "pro-Brexit" stance. "[The] Labour party has sold Scotland out by backing a hard Tory Brexit - and ruling out any return to the EU and single market," Flynn said. He added that a vote for the SNP was a vote "to reject Brexit". The SNP says an independent Scotland would rejoin the EU, and favours the reinstatement of free movement of people with the bloc to address labour shortages and an ageing population. Sir John Curtice, professor of politics at the University of Strathclyde, said the SNP message on Brexit would have salience in Scotland where two-thirds of people want to rejoin the EU. Labour believes it can still win in Scotland, with the party hoping to gain more than 20 seats. A party member in Rutherglen said its activists were more energised than their SNP counterparts, and that Labour could benefit from tactical voting by unionists seeking to kick out the SNP. "We do have the momentum going into the race, a good candidate, and we are confident in our strategy," said one Labour official, conceding the contest would still be "tough". Some also believe the question of Scottish independence could play to Labour's favour. The party opposes a second referendum. However, it hopes to lure independence supporters who are keen to overturn the Westminster government, which has repeatedly blocked the path of a second vote. Nearly half of Scots currently favour independence. Michael Shanks, the Labour party's candidate for the constituency, said: "I am going to stand up for the people in this constituency and I'm going to stand up against the Tory policies." Humza Yousaf is struggling to revive the fortunes of the SNP since his predecessor as leader, Nicola Sturgeon, stood down in March, with the party facing internal divisions and a policy inquiry into its use of party funding. Curtice said the primary driver of Labour's strong showing in the polls was the unpopularity of its opponents, which had made Starmer "arguably the luckiest general going". "He just needed to stand there and look half competent and half decent and things have fallen into his lap." Stephen Bush page 21 'This cautious strategy is going to be severely tested. The SNP will barrack us from the left' Graphic    Hunt for votes: Keir Starmer, centre, in Rutherglen with Labour leader in Scotland Anas Sarwar, left, and party candidate Michael Shanks. Below, the SNP's candidate, Katy Loudon Robert Perry/PA Load-Date: August 23, 2023  End of Document
