   Labour shows no passion for backing Britain - preferring to copy the EU; LETTERS to the EDITOR The Sunday Telegraph (London) September 24, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 19 Length: 276 words Body   SIR- Sir Keir Starmer has insisted that Britain will not diverge from EU regulations if Labour wins power at the next general election - in order to avoid conict (report, September 22). I wonder how his conversation with President Macron progressed when he suggested that the EU might follow some British rules and standards. I suspect the idea never entered his head as a possibility - which gives us a good idea as to how any negotiations with the EU would unfold with Sir Keir in charge. John Westwood East Grinstead, West Sussex - Sir Keir Starmer may deny it, but I fear there is a very real possibility that Britain will seek to rejoin the EU should he become prime minister. The Labour leader is considering giving votes to EU nationals and 16-year-olds. That's over four million votes. Both categories are more likely to be pro-Labour and the EU; in a referendum or election they would overturn the previous majority in favour of Brexit. Richard Larner Bournemouth, Dorset - Am I confused? On the one hand we are informed that after Brexit no one takes any notice of the UK. On the other, the Prime Minister makes an adjustment to the timing of implementation of green policies and we are told that all the world is taking notice as we have so much inuence. Lionel H Judd Wendover, Buckinghamshire - Julian Jessop is deluded if he thinks Brexit isn't to blame for our economic woes ("Ination, Remainers' last argument against Brexit, is now crumbling", Comment, September 21). Without London the UK is poorer than Mississippi. It may not all be Brexit, but it scuppered our talent supply chain, leaving fruit unpicked and lorries undriven. Mark Peaker London W1 Load-Date: September 24, 2023  End of Document
