   London apologizes to Europe CE Noticias Financieras English October 10, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 708 words Body   In British politics there is a kind of omertà about Brexit like the code of silence of the Mafia: it is untouchable, it is the will of the people, what is done is done.... The Conservatives and the right-wing press are clinging to the idea that on the whole it is a good thing and we just have to "take advantage of it". Labour, fearful of irritating potential Eurosceptic voters before the election, prefers not to even mention the word, lest it burn in their mouths. The exception is the Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, who has made a declaration of love for Europe and the one million citizens of EU countries still living in the English capital, and a denunciation of the terrible consequences of Brexit for trade, investment and culture. Without questioning his Europhilia, Khan has powerful reasons for this: he is up for re-election next year, and the German, French and Spanish vote may prove decisive (warning: Boris Johnson did the same when he was the London trustee, and then led the break with the continent). English language academies have lost many students and school groups are opting to go to Dublin. In any case, Khan has spoken without mincing words and explained how, as a result of Brexit, groups of European schoolchildren who came to practice English visit Ireland or Malta instead of London, because they can do so with the national identity card instead of applying for a visa that costs more than a hundred euros. Like luxury tourists (the kind that leave good money in hotels, restaurants and stores) prefer to go shopping in Paris, Barcelona or Milan rather than visiting Harrods and Bond Street, because in France, Italy and Spain they get VAT back on handbags, suits and shoes, but the UK does not. That theatrical casts and musical groups have given up touring because of the enormous bureaucracy involved. That language schools have lost many students and are in a downward business. Some have closed. "Dear Londoners from the European Union," the mayor has written in a letter to European residents, "I am aware that Brexit has caused enormous damage to our city, and great uncertainty for many of you. But you have decided to stay, despite the anti-immigration rhetoric of the government and despite having been used as pawns in the negotiations with Brussels. I am immensely grateful to you, and you are the reason London is one of the most vibrant and dynamic cities in the world. You will always be our friends, neighbors and colleagues. You are part of our common identity and future, and I will defend your rights, including the right to vote in British general elections, not just local elections" (a proposal launched by Labour leader Keir Starmer, but abandoned in the face of fierce opposition from the Tory press). Before Brexit, one and a half million children came annually to London on organized school trips to improve their English, half of them French and Germans who did not even have passports and came and went with their ID cards. That traffic has largely disappeared, because the new British Government requirements make the trips more onerous and complicated to organize, when going to Dublin is much cheaper and simpler. The mayor has also put his finger on "the monumental drop in trade, and the lack of labor in sectors such as hospitality, construction and clothing stores." Europeans who left during the pandemic have not returned, and boutiques, hotels and restaurants are finding it hard to find staff to stay open as many hours as they would like, clean rooms or do lunch and dinner shifts. An EU citizen, to get a work permit, needs a firm offer of employment with a guaranteed minimum salary of 30,000 euros a year. "My commitment," says Khan, "is to make London a better place to live and work despite Brexit, where British and EU citizens live together in a spirit of openness and internationalism. But he admits that the perception of the capital has changed for the worse in the last seven years, bankers and speculators have left the City for Frankfurt, Paris and Milan, there is less tourism and investment, less cultural exchange, and nothing is as it used to be. "Even though as a country we have left the EU, London is a European city, and the capital of Europe." That is Khan's dream. Load-Date: October 11, 2023  End of Document
