   Majority are not better off The Journal (Newcastle, UK) August 31, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 434 words Body   MY letter of August 21 listing Brexit benefits has brought quite a response. I would say to Rebecca Pidgeon (August 24) that she misses the point entirely, my letter wasn't about the structure of the EU or how it was formed, no political organisation is perfect. I was simply pointing out the fact that the majority of us are not better off for leaving the EU which is what we were promised. By the way, I think personally that a United States of Europe might not be a bad thing the way things are shaping up in the world, better together! To Mike Summersby I don't dispute the result of the referendum, but I do believe that the foremost Brexiters wanted to leave for purely ideological reasons (apart from Boris Johnson who acted in his own self interest) ably assisted by Jeremy Corbyn who failed to fight hard for remain for the same reason, thus betraying the majority of Labour voters. If he had been fully committed to remain the outcome may have been very different. I too lived my childhood during World War Two and it's notable that there has been over 70 years of peace between countries that were previously in conflict with each other since the formation of the EU. To John Hodgkins I would say that I think there is such a thing as a bad Brexit, we are experiencing it right now and it could get worse. Lots of people don't even know what powers Brussels has. When I asked three intelligent 'leavers' which laws they didn't like, one said metrication, one said the smoking ban and immigration, the other came up with nothing. When I asked readers in October 2019 the same thing one replied that he didn't like the fact that he couldn't buy coal tar soap, creosote or a quarter of bullets any more and he didn't like VAT. Another didn't like the Common Fisheries Policy and the Free Movement of People which they said had led to the mass immigration we were then seeing, fair enough. Brexit has certainly put paid to the latter. The EU has a lot less power over the domestic issues of member states than people imagine. Bureaucrats, civil servants, don't make decisions, they advise their bosses and implement on behalf of them. As for the consequences of Brexit they won't be as good or bad as we make them, unfortunately for Mr Hodgkins most of the consequences of Brexit will be dictated by the largest trading bloc in the world, a bloc that other countries are queueing up to join. Mr Hodgkins might find that any 'enhanced democracy' that he thinks will be a consequence of Brexit will, under a Conservative government, be to the detriment of the majority and the advantage of the few. A.W. Gosforth Load-Date: August 31, 2023  End of Document
