   May confuses fact and fiction in her new memoir i-news September 14, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 21 Length: 681 words Byline: Ian Dunt Body   Ever since Theresa May left office, she has been telling a story about a prime minister who never existed. She was a great prime minister. She fought valiantly for a pragmatic middle-way on Brexit. This version of the prime minister was born on the morning she resigned from Downing Street, when she stood outside the door of No 10 and sang the praises of "compromise". With a new book out, she is now telling the BBC's Political Thinking podcast that she "wanted to deliver a Brexit that recognised the concerns of the 48 per cent". If this version of prime minister Theresa May had ever existed, we would be in a better place than we are now. But she didn't, so we're not. May never represented some moderate wing of the Conservative party. She was on its hard right fringe. As home secretary, she introduced the Hostile Environment policy, which eventually led to the Windrush scandal. She sent out vans with the words "Go Home" emblazoned on them into immigrant areas. In 2015, in a keynote speech at the Conservative party conference, she said immigration had "close to zero" net economic and fiscal benefits. There was "no case, in the national interest, for immigration of the scale we have experienced". Then she became prime minister. At this point, there was a genuine Brexit compromise position available to her. The vote had been close. This needed to be handled delicately and honestly. The outline of that compromise was perfectly clear, because other countries, like Norway, already used it. It was to stay in the single market and the customs union. This would have preserved the UK's economy and removed the need for checks. In the years to come, this came to be seen as politically impossible, because it would have retained free movement. In reality, it was nothing of the sort. Polls conducted during and after the referendum found between 20 to 40 per cent of Leave voters were either relaxed about immigration. Indeed, in the days after the vote, it was the outcome Boris Johnson himself seemed to support, when he told Telegraph readers: "British people will still be able to go and work in the EU; to live; to travel; to study; to buy homes and to settle down." May could have spoken the language of trade-offs and compromise. She could have genuinely pursued the middle ground. Instead, she told delegates at the 2016 Tory conference: "I know some people ask about the 'trade-off' between controlling immigration and trading with Europe. But that is the wrong way of looking at things… We will decide for ourselves how we control immigration." Then she made clear that this went to the heart of national identity. "If you believe you're a citizen of the world, she said, "you're a citizen of nowhere." May had taken Ukip's nativist worldview and absorbed it into what had, until then, been a centre-right Conservative party. It meant that Britain would pursue a hard Brexit in which reducing immigration would trump the maintenance of trade with Europe. It meant that customs and regulatory borders would go up. Once that was decided, the whole contorted horror story of the next few years became inevitable. The state of Britain after Brexit is a complete vindication of the warnings critics made. We are poorer than we would otherwise be. Our economic, diplomatic, trading and political power status is diminished. We are increasingly a shadow of our former self. Last week, the US and EU announced a plan to build an economic corridor linking Europe with the Middle East and India. Britain was nowhere to be seen. May could have pursued a genuine compromise position. She could have faced down the hard Brexiters in her party with at least half the relish with which she lambasted the Remainers. Instead, she encouraged their fever dreams and then fell victim to that which she had nurtured. That's the story of the real prime minister Theresa May. The imaginary one which she is now describing would have been far superior. It's a shame she couldn't have invented her while she was still in power. If this version of May existed we would be in a better place than we are now Load-Date: September 14, 2023  End of Document
