   Mhairi Black urges young people to vote in Rutherglen and Hamilton West by-election The Herald September 20, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 596 words Byline: Jody Harrison Body   SNP deputy Westminster leader Mhairi Black has urged young people to turn out in the Rutherglen and Hamilton West by-election claiming -Westminster has shafted young people across Scotland-. Ms Black - who still holds the record for the youngest MP ever elected when she was voted into Westminster at just 20 - wrote an open letter to young people ahead of the October 5 poll. She claimed the new voter ID law which will be implemented for the first time in Scotland in the South Lanarkshire seat was designed -to stop eligible voters from having their say at elections-, disproportionately impacting young people. The Paisley and Renfrewshire South MP sought to paint Labour - her party-s main opponent in the seat - as -pro-Brexit- and anti-young people. -The pro-Brexit Labour Party is lurching further and further to the right under Sir Keir Starmer - who has abandoned young people by dumping a raft of policies, including the right to free higher education,- she said. READ MORE: SNP launch focuses on cost-of-living crisis in Rutherglen by-election -In Scotland, the SNP has achieved so much for young people: scrapping tuition fees, free bus travel for under-22s, rent controls to give more rights to tenants and delivered real action on the climate crisis as one of the first nations to declare a global climate emergency. -With independence we could do so much more. -Young people deserve so much more than a narrow choice between red Tories and blue Tories. -No wonder Westminster is blocking eligible voters from having their say.- She also hit out at the Westminster system, saying: -Bluntly, Westminster has shafted young people across Scotland. -The cost-of-living crisis has forced prices up and squeezed incomes - turning the goal of home ownership into a pipe dream for many young people who are blocked from getting on the property ladder. Katy Loudon is the SNP-s candidate in the seat -Then there-s Brexit. Brexit, supported by both the Labour Party and the Tories, has ripped away so many opportunities from young people in Scotland. -The Erasmus scheme once provided young Scots with the opportunity to live, work, study and travel freely throughout Europe. -These once-in-a-lifetime opportunities were snatched away from young people by Westminster while our colleges, universities and businesses suffered too.- Ms Black-s intervention came as Labour-s candidate in the seat, Michael Shanks, called for the SNP-s Katy Loudon to condemn plans to downgrade neonatal care at University Hospital Wishaw and consolidate care in Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen. He said: -The neonatal service at Wishaw University Hospital plays a vital role in the community but faced with the actions of her government, Katy Loudon has indulged in a conspiracy of silence.- READ MORE: Blackford and Gray hit SNP by-election trail with anti-Brexit message A petition in opposition to the plans has garnered more than 12,000 signatures. Scottish Labour deputy leader Jackie Baillie said: -This is tragic from the SNP. -The SNP can try to deny it all they want, but the fact is that young people are being failed by both the Tories and the SNP. -From the cost of living and the housing crisis, to strikes at universities and colleges, the SNP is clearly not on the side of young people. -We all know that the SNP is fond of using exploitative zero hours contracts but the fact that they still regard them as a -positive destination- for young people says it all. -While the SNP do the Tories- dirty work by attacking Labour, our candidate Michael Shanks is standing for real change for young people.- Load-Date: October 10, 2023  End of Document
