   Migrant arrivals in the United Kingdom have almost tripled despite Brexit pledges CE Latin America Migration English June 5, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 ContentEngineLLC All Rights Reserved Length: 1865 words Body    Reino Unido      Getty Images  Three successive prime ministers promised it. And all ended their terms in office without achieving it. Reducing migration to the UK has been a consistent Conservative Party pledge over the 13 years it has been in power. David Cameron and Theresa May talked about bringing the figure down to "tens of thousands". Boris Johnson "learned the lesson of an overly specific promise" and simply stated that the numbers would fall after Brexit, notes Chris Mason, political editor of the BBC . However, Mason adds, the promises of all three politicians "were wiped out by reality". The rhetoric again clashed with the facts in the government of current Prime Minister Rishi Sunak. Net migration (people arriving in the UK minus those leaving) stood at 606,000 in 2022, according to data released in May by the British Office for National Statistics (ONS)  . The data are for people who arrived in the U.K. for at least 12 months. The figure represents an increase of 164,000 over the 2021 total. And it is almost triple the net migration in 2019, which was estimated at226,000. The campaign in favor of Brexit promised above all to regain control of the borders or "take back control", as the popular slogan of those who pushed for the exit from the European Union used to say. How then can it be explained that almost 7 years after the vote in favor of Brexit net migration is still on the rise?   Mujer con una pancarta a favor de Brexit       Getty Images Controlling borders to reduce migration was a central promise of the Brexit campaign.    Behind the increase are three main factors, according to ONS data and experts consulted by the BBC. 1-International students The figure of 606,000 net migrants in 2022 results from subtracting 557,000 (those who left) from 1.2 million (those who arrived). Of that 1.2 million entrants, 925,000 came from outside the European Union.And of those, nearly 40% came on student visas. "International students are a very important source of income for British universities," Mariña Fernández Reino, a senior researcher at Oxford University's Migration Observatory, told BBC Mundo. "Universities were very dependent on students from China, who were the vast majority of international students coming in recent  years. "So the government promoted a diversification strategy so that, in case that flow of students went down, university admissions wouldn't suffer so much."  Estudiantes graduados de Imperial College, una de las universidades más prestigiosas de Londres.       Getty Images Graduate students at Imperial College, one of London's most prestigious universities.    Peter Walsh, an expert at the same center at Oxford University, told the BBC that there have been initiatives by the government and the universities themselves to recruit students from, for example, India and Nigeria. "International students pay higher tuition fees that subsidize the education of local students in the UK," Walsh added . To attract students, the government less than two years ago introduced so-called "post study work" or "work after study"  . " This means that if you come as an international student you can stay for two years working in any job, even if it is not related to what you have studied," explained Fernández Reino. "This made the option of coming to the UK more attractive than before, when you could come for a year but then you had to leave. " Another factor that increased the numbers is that students from India, Nigeria and other countries often come with their families. Fernández Reino noted that "a high percentage come with dependents, with partners or with children. So this means that the number of people coming on student visas has increased a lot. Most of the students from China, on the other hand, came alone". Walsh told the BBC that last year international students brought "around 100,000 partners and children."  Control de pasaportes en un aeropuerto británico       Getty Images Starting next year, only master's and research doctorate students will be able to bring their family members.   New restrictions on studentsThe Rishi Sunak government recently announced limitations on the entry of students' dependents. Fernandez Reino explained that starting next   year only those coming for master's degrees or research doctorateswill be able to bring dependents  . "This will of course have an impact on two things. One is that fewer will come, because only the student who enrolls will be able to do so. And another is that the change may make it less attractive to study in the U.K." "Research masters degrees are normally two years and are the ones that give access to a doctoral program here. It's a very small percentage of master's degrees. And they have not been banned from bringing in dependents because if you have a family you can't split four years. " The Russell Group, which represents most of Britain's top universities, said the new restrictions will impact the ability of study centers to attract the "vital income" that international students bring .  Migración a Reino Unido en 2022. [ 606.000 migración neta (los que llegaron menos los que se fueron) ],[ 1,2 millones llegaron y 557.000 se fueron ],[ 925.000 de esos 1,2 millones vinieron de fuera de la UE ],[ 39% de esos 925.000 fueron estudiantes internacionales ], Source: Fuente: ONS, Image: Persona con pasaportes en la mano  2-Work visas  The second largest driver of the increase in net migrants in 2022 was the number of workers from outside the European Union(EU). Their number nearly doubled from 137,000 to 235,000 in the space of a year. In the case of EU citizens, more people left the UK in 2022 (202,000) than arrived (151,000), according to the ONS .       Cuidador sosteniendo las manos de una persona mayor       Getty Images Care and health care workers were included in skilled visas for the first time.    The increase in workers from outside the EU was primarily due to the extension of the visa for "skilled workers" or skilled workers. That route, prior to Brexit, already allowed entry for skilled people sponsored by British companies or institutions, such as doctors or nurses. But in 2022, "more occupations that are often not considered fully skilled" were included. The most important one is care workers with a bit of experience, what they call senior care workers, who can now come and were previously excluded.  " We are seeing a lot of visas increase because those workers coming on special visas for the health sector. " The top three countries of origin for health sector caregivers are India, Nigeria and Zimbabwe, according to the ONS. Vidia Ruhomutally, who emigrated to the Kingdom from Mauritius decades ago, owns a nursing home in Norfolk County, three hours from London  . Ruhomutally told the BBC that she hires many of her workers from India. "Without India we wouldn't be here," she said . "And without us, the local hospital would have busy beds that it couldn't free up for other patients."  Vidia Ruhomutally       BBC Vidia Ruhomutally hires many workers from India at her medical home.     3-Ukraine and Hong Kong Resettlement schemes created in the wake of what the ONS calls "unprecedented global events" were the third largest driver of the increase in net migration. The number of non-EU nationals arriving in the UK via humanitarian routes increased from 9% to 19% in 2022. At least 114,000  Ukrainians and 52,000 Hong Kong nationals entered for at least 12 months in 2022. The latter were offered a special visa scheme after China imposed a national security law on the former British colony. How one of the UK's poorest cities became a haven for Hong Kongers fleeing China.  Mujeres con pancartas a favor de la ayuda a refugiados ucranianos       Getty Images At least 114,000 Ukrainians entered for at least 12 months in 2022.   "The numbers are too high " Prime Minister Rishi Sunak reacted to the figures released in May by insisting that migration is "not out of control". In a TV interview on the day the data was released Sunak said, "The numbers are too high, it's as simple as that. And I want to reduce them. " The net migration figure could go down in the future, according to Dominic Casciani, the BBC's home affairs and legal correspondent. "The inflow of people from Ukraine and Hong Kong is expected to cease and the inflows of workers may stabilize."   On the other hand, "the outflow of international students should increase, while many new ones will no longer be able to bring their family members," Casciani added , "predicting is always difficult, there is uncertainty. But we are seeing from the data that came out for December 2022, compared to September, that migration has not continued to grow". As for the inflows from Ukraine "they were concentrated just in the months after the invasion and then have been progressively decreasing, although it is always difficult to make a forecast because it is true that there can be a very large deterioration of the conditions of the war" .       Rishi Sunak       Getty Images One of Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's priorities is to "stop the boats" (stop de boats), a reference to those who cross the English Channel in search of asylum.    For the expert, the influx of care and health care workers could continue to increase, if there are no changes in regulations. "We know there is a very big labor shortage in those two sectors. But I still think the overall numbers are going to go down because more people are leaving. " On irregular migration, the government announced a controversial plan in 2022 to send asylum seekers to Rwanda. The initiative was not yet implemented due to appeals raised in the British courts and an intervention by the European Court of Human Rights. For Dominic Casciani, the numbers entering the UK "could fall by another 70,000 people if the government's controversial plan to divert almost all asylum claims abroad works, but that's a conditional 'if' as big as the height of the Cliffs of Dover."  Personas con pancartas en contra del plan del gobierno británico de enviar solicitantes de asilo a Ruans       Getty Images The government announced a controversial plan to send asylum seekers to Rwanda in 2022.   Costs and benefitsChris Mason points out that migration is much more than a question of numbers. It is an issue that is also about "emotion, communities and public services . For Fernández Reino, it is important to keep in mind that often "politicians overestimate their ability to regulate migration flows.  Now they are going to try with the issue of reducing the number of student dependents." The change may, however, come at a great cost to universities,  says Fernández Reino  . Reducing net migration "always benefits or hurts someone. "And even on the issue of irregular migration and asylum seekers, many times tightening measures don't have the intended effect of limiting people arriving."   Gráfico de la migración a Reino Unido por nacionalidad       BBC Read alsoBBCNews WorldWhatwas the Good Friday Agreement that has given Northern Ireland 25 years of peaceIt is considered one of the most successful peace negotiations in recent history. But the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union has brought new challenges.  YouTubeTeleticacom  Load-Date: June 6, 2023  End of Document
