   Nature restoration and Brexit fund top agenda at meeting   Irish Examiner June 1, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 Landmark Digital Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 742 words Byline: Kathleen O'Sullivan Body   Farm organisations met the Government last week to "drive home key farming messages", with the EU Nature Restoration Law and Bre-xit fund topping the agenda. Speaking after the IFA delegation met Taoiseach Leo Varadkar to discuss farming issues, deputy president Brian Rushe said he acknowledged Mr Varadkar's comments relaying his concerns about the proposed restoration law. The law's aim is to cover at least 20% of EU land and sea areas by 2030 with nature restoration measures, and eventually extend these to all ecosystems in need of restoration by 2050. One of the most contentious targets in the proposals is around restoring and rewetting drained peatland under agricultural use. "However, we were clear that the Government must oppose the proposal and ensure a full impact assessment is done before any law is put in place," Mr Rushe said. Mr Rushe said the IFA also raised the Brexit Adjustment Reserve fund "and queried why this cannot be used to assist vulnerable sectors such as beef, sheep, tillage and horticulture, which have clearly been hit by the consequences of Brexit". The Brexit Adjustment Reserve fund aims to provide financial support to the member states, regions, and sectors most affected by Brexit. Ireland, as the member state most affected, has received an allocation of over  1bn, or just over 20% of the entire reserve. "It will be a major own goal if this funding is not spent before the deadline of December 31, 2023," Mr Rushe said. The IFA also told the Taoi-seach that the Department of Agriculture's plan to delay certain farm payments by up to a month in 2023 "would be totally unacceptable". The "need to retain" the nitrates derogation at 250kg, problems with the residential zoned land tax, and climate-related matters were also discussed. Speaking following the meeting with the Taoiseach and Department of Agriculture ministers, the president of the Irish Cattle and Sheep Farmers Association, Dermot Kelleher, said that he remains concerned that the powers of the new agri-food regulator are "too weak in their current format". "If the ambition is to drive fair play for farmers in the food chain, then the legislation must be robust enough to deliver that. We think the draft regulation is too weak," Mr Kelleher said. "For too long, cheap food and undercutting has enabled supermarkets to make big profits off other items. "Cutting 10c off a litre of milk won't be much good to a family when toothpaste is being sold at up to  100 per litre. "Toothpaste manufacturers don't have to deal with huge escalation in feed, fertiliser, and fuel costs. Beef and lamb cannot be sold at below the cost of production." The ICSA also reiterated its calls for a support package for the sheep sector. "The  12 per ewe in the CAP is not fit for purpose. Sheep prices earlier this year and last autumn were worse than previous years despite costs going through the roof," Mr Kelleher said. "We suggested that the Brexit Adjustment Reserve could be used. "We cannot understand how the reserve can be used for genomic sampling, mainly for dairy farmers, but it can't be used for the sheep sector. That makes no sense to a sheep farmer." Mr Kelleher said he wants to see Budget 2024 deliver a suckler scheme "that would be open to all, with no quota restrictions, no limits on the number of cows, and no five-year contracts". At the meeting, the Taoi-seach gave a commitment to review Macra's proposed farm succession scheme, which members are hopeful will be included in the upcoming budget. Macra has long proposed an on-farm succession scheme that supports the older generation of farmers to step back while also supporting the younger generation to become active farmers. Macra national president Elaine Houlihan said that farm succession is "vitally important to secure a future for young farmers throughout Ireland". Speaking last week, Irish Creamery Milk Suppliers Association deputy president Denis Drennan said that urgent issues and challenges for the industry are "queued out the door, down the road, and around the corner". "We are genuinely not sure that the Government understands or appreciates the level of downright panic that already exists and is growing daily due to their perceived indifference and poor communication of policy," Mr Drennan said. "Rural areas that depend on farming are losing heart and, worse, are losing trust in the Government's commitment to our biggest indigenous economic engine and activity," he said. Load-Date: June 6, 2023  End of Document
