   NatWest falls sharply in stock market after cutting forecasts and the 'Farage case'. NAFTA (English) October 27, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 Content Engine LLC All Rights Reserved Length: 1252 words Byline: Álvaro Estévez Body   Stock market setback for NatWest. The British bank has lost more than 10% in the English market and has reached lows not seen since 2021 after publishing its quarterly results, cutting its forecasts for 2023 and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA ) announcing that it identified possible "regulatory breaches" in the decision to close the accounts of Nigel Farage, former UKIP leader and visible face of Brexit, in its subsidiary Coutts. First, the company announced that it forecasts a net interest margin, a key measure of financial institutions' profitability, "in excess of 3%", a notable downgrade from its previous forecast which put this magnitude at around 3.15% and which had already been cut months earlier. Similarly, NatWest lowered its revenue forecast to £14.3 billion from £14.8 billion previously. "The economic outlook and the resulting customer behavior remain uncertain," the British bank said. The company has also indicated that in the medium term it expects to obtain a "sustainable" RoTE of between 14% and 16%, as well as a cost/income ratio below 50% in 2025, a CET1 ratio in the range of 13%-14% and "continue to generate and return significant capital through ordinary dividends and share buybacks." On the other hand, the results reflected a profit improvement of close to 50%in the first nine months of the year. Between January and September, NatWest's profits amounted to £3,344 million and tripled in the last quarter (+260%) to £924 million. Revenues closed the last quarter with a 1.7% increase to 2,685 million pounds, while in the first nine months of the year sales amounted to 11,215 million (+200%). On the other hand, net interest margin in the quarter was 2.94% compared to 3.13% in the second quarter and 2.99% a year ago. The bank attributed this result to changes in the composition of deposits, as customers moved their savings to interest-bearing accounts, and the continued impact on mortgage margins. Similarly, the CET1 ratio closed September at 13.5% from 14.2% previously. These figures fell short of consensus expectations. On the one hand, experts expected NatWest's earnings and revenues to be slightly higher, while they expected it to report a CET1 ratio 3 tenths of a point higher. The experts also expected the net interest margin to close September at around 3.07%. FARAGE CASE NatWest's fall also reflects the latest news on the case of Nigel Farage's closure of accounts at Coutts. This Friday, the UK FCA reported that its investigation highlighted "potential breaches" of regulation and "a number of areas for improvement" in the handling of the case, such as the "systems and controls around how they consider the potential closure of accounts" or the "allocation of responsibilities and effectiveness of governance mechanisms" at NatWest and Coutts. "In recent weeks, we have confirmed to both companies that we are reviewing the operation of the companies' governance, systems and controls to identify and address any significant deficiencies. This oversight work will include the use of our statutory information gathering powers, interviews with relevant bank personnel and reviews of appropriate policies or procedures. Consideration will also be given to how these issues may affect the fair treatment of customers generally," the FCA explained in a statement. The FCA's response came shortly after NatWest made public the findings of a report commissionedfrom law firm Travers Smith on its decision to close Farage's bank account. According to the law firm, the bank's closure of Farage's account "was lawful and taken in accordance with the bank's relevant policies and processes," but it also identified "a number of shortcomings in how the decision was reached, how the bank communicated with Mr. Farage and how it treated his confidential information." Specifically, the report notes that the bank's former CEO, Alison Rose, was not involved in the decision and that the closure of the Farage account was "predominantly, a commercial decision" as Coutts "considered its relationship with Mr. Farage to be commercially unviable because it generated significant losses." Rose resigned last July after admitting a "serious error of judgment" in the process. "There were other factors considered as part of the decision-making process. The most important of those factors was the risk Coutts perceived to its reputation in the eyes of its shareholders. But these were not, in Travers Smith's view, the factors that drove the exit decision," the report adds. On the other hand, the law firm also stresses that "Mr. Farage's public statements on various issues were not a determining factor in the exit decision," although they did "support the decision." NatWest has indicated that it "has accepted and will implement all recommendations" made by Travers Smith, in addition to making a number of changes to its policies and procedures to ensure "that clients' legally protected beliefs or opinions do not play any role in exit, retention or onboarding decisions." "We apologize once again to Mr. Farage for his treatment. His experience fell short of what any client should expect. Our job now is to make sure this does not happen again. The Board is considering the findings and deciding on appropriate outcomes in other matters. It is important that we take into account all the necessary processes and due consideration of the issues, including the bank's obligations around privacy and confidentiality," said Sir Howard Davies, chairman of the bank. For his part, Farage considers that the report is not only an attempt to "whitewash" the entity, but that it is "hilarious" and that the evidence provided "is not entirely coherent." According to the former Brexit leader, the Travers Smith report underlines that the pro-Brexit stance was not influential in the closure of accounts despite the fact that "the word Brexit appeared no less than 86 times" in the entity's response. He has also accused the firm of not being a neutral party given that its chairman emeritus, Chris Hale, is "a pro-Remain lawyer who once described pro-Brexit people as racist and xenophobic." VALUATIONS Richard Hunter, director of markets at Interactive Investor, highlights that the "disappointing" results of British banking have been replicated in NatWest, "although perhaps to a lesser extent." Specifically, this expert stresses that the decline in net interest margin across the sector has dented share prices and suggests that the benefits of higher interest rates have peaked, as customers "seek a higher return on their cash after years of near-zero returns." In terms of impairment, on the other hand, the news is "slightly more positive." "The new provision of £229 million this quarter brings the figure to £452 million year-to-date, significantly lower than its peers. For some, it will be a reflection of the lower-risk loan portfolio the bank manages, while NatWest has stated that default levels are stable," he details. Similarly, Hunter stresses that his outlook "largely" reflects current performance levels. The strategist also stresses that the 7.5% dividend yield is "better than the sector." "It may be of little consolation to shareholders at this time, but the further fall will strengthen the investment case for valuation reasons and, despite the obvious despair, the bank remains stable and profitable. In fact, the market consensus to buy the stock could consolidate once the waters have settled after a torrid third quarter for the sector," he says. Load-Date: October 28, 2023  End of Document
