   NIC PUT BACK IN HER BOX; BACK The Sun (England) June 30, 2023 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 1,9 Length: 380 words Byline: RACHEL WATSON Body   NICOLA Sturgeon was given a ticking-off at the Covid inquiry yesterday - for using the witness stand as a "soapbox". The probe's lead counsel, Hugo Keith KC, pulled up the former First Minister after she tried to blame Brexit for her government's pandemic planning failures. The ex-SNP leader told the hearing that preparations for Britain leaving the EU had diverted staff and cash needed to prepare for a major virus outbreak. But Mr Keith said: "Ms Sturgeon, I'm so sorry, that's a witness box not a soapbox. We cannot allow the political debate of Brexit to be ventilated here." His rap Continued on Page Nine Continued from Page One came as Ms Sturgeon was quizzed over the Scottish Government's preparedness for a pandemic before the bug emerged in early 2020. She insisted "not many, if any" areas "were not impacted by the planning for Brexit generally and a no-deal Brexit". After listing a series of areas were extra resources were needed, she added: "Every part of our work was impacted by this. "And it was a matter of deep and extreme regret and frustration for us at the time." Ms Sturgeon was asked why the threat of an influenza pandemic had not been prioritised over Brexit planning when it had been seen as the "greatest risk facing the nation". She replied: "I think every aspect of Brexit has been a false economy, if I can put it mildly. But that is another issue altogether". But it was then that Mr Keith stepped in to deliver his dressing-down to the ex-First Minister. And last night she was slammed by the Scottish Tories' health spokesman Dr Sandesh Gulhane. He said: "True to form, Nicola Sturgeon tried to blame something or someone else for Scotland's lack of preparedness for the pandemic. It's her default response to any criticism. "So it was encouraging to see the inquiry KC stop her in her tracks by swiping away her soapbox. "On such a serious subject, she should stick to defending her government's actions rather than political point-scoring." During a second evidence session yesterday, former Deputy First Minister John Swinney said there was a good amount of cooperation between the Scottish and UK governments in times of emergency. But he added "generally, relationships were pretty poor" - partly due to fears over a no-deal Brexit. The Sun Says - Page Ten Graphic    'Blame' ... Dr Gulhane Load-Date: June 30, 2023  End of Document
