   No 10 refuses to follow Cleverly in setting end of 2024 as target date for ending all small boat crossings – UK politics live The Guardian (London) January 2, 2024 Tuesday 9:19 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:14 Length: 5527 words Byline: Andrew Sparrow Highlight: Downing Street refuses to endorse home secretary as he says his aim is to reduce number of people crossing Channel on small boats to ‘zero’ Body   block-time published-time 4.23pm GMT  Several readers have asked why Nigel Farage was quoted earlier in the blog. Some people argued that he should be ignored because his views are objectionable. Doubtless a lot of Guardian readers feel the same way, but if reporting is meant to be describing the world as it is, then you can’t just ignore the people and the views you don’t like. The main objection, though, was that Farage’s views did not merit reporting because he’s not a significant political figure. As one person put it, he’s “now just a reality TV contestant”. But he’s not. Rather, he is a reality TV contestant, but he’s not just a reality TV contestant. He is almost certainly the most influential, and talented, far-right populist politician in the UK. He did not deliver Brexit singlehandedly, but he did as much as anyone to make it happen, making him one of the most consequential British politicians of the postwar era.  He did all that without being an MP, and quite a lot of the time he wasn’t even Ukip leader either (because he kept resigning). He has got a clear interest in mobilising populist opinion, he has a big following with the public, he is the dominant figure in one political party (Reform UK), and is very popular with members of another (Tories – 70% of members favour letting him rejoin  ). In the next Conservative party leadership contest any candidate wanting to win is going to say they would allow Farage to be readmitted and it is possible to imagine him back in, and even party leader, before the election after the one due this year. He probably has more chance of leading the Tories into the 2028 general election campaign than Suella Braverman. So I don’t think it’s realistic to argue that his views don’t count; if Brexit is any guide, then people should have been taking him more seriously in the pre-2016 years, not less. And one reader queried my assertion that he in effect controls Reform UK. When I wrote that, I included a link to this Unherd article  by Tom McTague that backs this up. (Links are always included in the blog for a reason – do click on them if you are ever unsure why I am saying something.) McTague’s article is well worth reading in full but here is the relevant passsage. Reform UK is no ordinary political party. In many ways, it is less a political party than a company, with shareholders and an ever-growing number of customers. Tice may be the leader of the party, but he is ultimately answerable to those shareholders – and the majority are owned by, you guessed it, Farage himself. Originally, the idea behind this set-up was simple. At Ukip, Farage had grown increasingly tired of the party’s internal bureaucratic struggles. When he set up the Brexit party in March 2019, he was determined to avoid a repetition of this, and so created a company he could control, rather than a party he had to manage. This allowed Farage to focus all his efforts on the campaign for Brexit … While the exact details of who owns what percentages of Reform UK remain veiled in secrecy, according to one inside figure who knows the breakdown it is simple enough. In total there are 15 shares, of which Farage owns eight, Tice five, Oakden one and the party secretary, Mehrtash a’Zami, one. According to Companies House, this makes Farage – officially – a person with “significant control” over the company, which they define as having “the right, directly or indirectly, to appoint or remove a majority of the board of directors”. McTague says Farage’s colleagues in Reform UK aren’t sure whether or not Farage would rejoin the Tories. McTague says Richard Tice, the Reform UK leader, wants Labour to win the election because he thinks it will introduce electoral reform, making it possible for a small party such as Reform UK to win seats in parliament. Given Keir Starmer’s record on PR, the chances of that seem remote – which is another reason why Farage may one day conclude that the Conservative party would offer him a more useful political platform. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.46pm GMT block-time published-time 3.25pm GMT  A reader asks: On Radio 4 Today this morning Cleverly claimed illegal entrant returns were substantially up – I think he said by 2/3. But he gave no absolute numbers. It is significant if an extra 10,000 were returned! An extra 10, less so. Do we have any numbers on this? The figures are in this Home Office dataset.  It shows that, in the year ending September 2023, there were 3,875 enforced returns. That is an increase of more than 50% on the previous year, but still quite a low figure by comparison with what was happening in the years before 2020. Voluntary returns numbered 10,896 in the year ending September 2023. Again, this was up on the previous year, by 74%, but well below the pre-2020 norm.     Returns figures Photograph: Home Office     block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.48pm GMT block-time published-time 3.10pm GMT   Almost 100,000 people waiting for asylum application decision, figures show   Almost 100,000 people seeking asylum in the UK are waiting for a decision, Rajeev Syal reports. The figures come from a table in this dataset  published by the Home Office today alongside the figures purporting to show that it has cleared the “legacy” backlog of asylum claims. As Rajeev reports, of the current 98,599 backlog, 34% (33,085) are eligible to be sent to Rwanda because they applied after the Illegal Migration Act became law, the figures suggest. Here is the table.     Asylum application backlog figures Photograph: Home Office    And here is Rajeev’s story.  Related:  Cleverly says UK asylum backlog cleared as almost 100,000 wait for decision block-time published-time 1.57pm GMT  The first UK maritime shipment of aid for Gaza has arrived in Egypt, carrying almost 90 tonnes of thermal blankets and other essential items, PA Media reports. PA says: The shipment was delivered from Cyprus by Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship Lyme Bay, carrying thermal blankets, shelter packs and medical supplies provided by the UK and the Republic of Cyprus. From Port Said, the aid will be received by the Egyptian Red Crescent and will make its way to Arish and then through Rafah and into Gaza for distribution by UNRWA, the UN agency for Palestinian refugees. The UK will continue to explore other routes for aid deliveries, including the Cypriot initiative for a maritime corridor between Cyprus and Israel/Occupied Palestinian Territories and supporting United Nations World Food Programme through the humanitarian land corridor from Jordan through Kerem Shalom, the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office said in its news release. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.04pm GMT block-time published-time 1.49pm GMT   SNP became too reliant on Nicola Sturgeon, says Mhairi Black, its deputy leader at Westminster   The SNP became too reliant on Nicola Sturgeon, its deputy leader at Westminster, Mhairi Black, has said. In an interview with Times Radio, Black said that although the former first minister was a huge asset to her party, she was “uncomfortable” with how dominant Sturgeon became. Asked if the “cult of personality” around Sturgeon had been a challenge for the SNP, Black replied: For me, personally, yes. It always made me quite uncomfortable. But as I say, I do think she’s one of the best, if not the best-performing politicians that I’ve seen. I’ve rarely seen anybody get the better of Nicola Sturgeon. So, in that sense, of course, she’s a massive asset to have. But I remember I did always feel a wee bit uncomfortable, we shouldn’t be relying on one face or one person. It should be about the movement and about the vision of what we want to see change and what we want to happen. There’s a balance to be struck and I’m not convinced that we always got the balance right … I’ve always had my issues with how [the party] is run or how decisions have been arrived at. Sturgeon resigned last year after more than eight years as first minister. Black said she thought that was “actually quite healthy” for the SNP. She explained: I’m a big believer in politics should be about policy as opposed to personality.      Mhairi Black. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod/The Guardian     block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.58pm GMT block-time published-time 1.37pm GMT   Stephen Kinnock, the shadow immigration minister, has described Rishi Sunak’s post on X saying he has cleared the backlog of asylum applications as a “barefaced lie”. (See 12.34pm. ) The PM’s barefaced lie that he has cleared the asylum backlog would be laughable if it wasn’t such an insult to the public’s intelligence. Statistics published this morning by his own Govt show there are still around 100,000 cases languishing in the Tories’ never-ending backlog. enltrThe PM's barefaced lie that he has cleared the asylum backlog would be laughable if it wasn't such an insult to the public's intelligence. Statistics pulished this morning by his own Govt show there are still around 100,000 cases languishing in the Tories' never-ending backlog. https://t.co/9CrXv77Qj4  — Stephen Kinnock (@SKinnock) January 2, 2024 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.44pm GMT block-time published-time 1.23pm GMT   Reduction in small boat crossings in 2023 not related to poor weather, No 10 says   At the Downing Street lobby briefing the PM’s spokesperson also insisted that the reduction in small boat crossings in 2023 was not related to poor weather conditions. The spokesperson said: As ever with small boats, we are always alive to seasonal effects. But I think given the substantive and sustained decline, it is wrong to claim that this big reduction, this 36% reduction, is down to poor weather. In fact, that assertion is not backed up by the facts. The number of good sailing days this year was only four fewer than the previous year. There were 106 ‘red days’ in 2022, 102 in 2023. And we are bucking the trend of what we are seeing in Europe, where crossings are up significantly.” So-called “red days” are days when the weather is deemed favourable for small boat crossings. They are red days for Border Force officials who have to deal with the arrivals. block-time published-time 1.06pm GMT   No 10 refuses to follow Cleverly in setting end of 2024 as target date for ending all small boat crossings    James Cleverly, the home secretary, told LBC this morning that his aim was to reduce the number of people crossing the Channel on small boats to “zero” in 2024. Asked what his target for the year was, he replied: My target is to bring it down to zero. When the presenter, Nick Ferrari, asked him to confirm that he meant zero by the end of 2024, Cleverly replied: That’s my target. My target is to reduce it to zero, to stop the boats. And I’m unambiguous about that. And the point is, actually last year, the final figures last year, it was 36% reduction year on year. In the last half of last year, compared with the last half of the year before that, it was down by 45%. And the last quarter of last year, compared to the last quarter of the year before that, it was down by over 60%. So the trend is heading in the right direction. But at the Downing Street lobby briefing this morning the prime minister’s spokesperson refused to endorse the end of the year as a target date for the elimination of small boat crossings. “I’m not setting a specific deadline beyond wanting to pass that legislation so we can get flights off the ground to provide the deterrent effect that is necessary,” he said. Although Downing Street has adopted “stop the boats” as a target and a slogan, it has never said when this might happen. Rishi Sunak has suggested he does not expect this to happen before the election.  This is another example of how promises can be counterproductive. (See 12.30pm. ) If Sunak had simply pledged last year to reduce small boat crossings, his article for the Express today  would have been about how that was a promise kept. But, of course, he could not have said that last year because he would have been criticised by Tory MPs and rightwing papers for lack of ambition. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.16pm GMT block-time published-time 12.39pm GMT  At the Downing Street lobby briefing this morning the PM’s spokesperson claimed the government had “gone further” than promised in tackling the asylum application backlog. In response to comments from Labour and others saying the legacy backlog has not been fully cleared, the spokesperson said: We committed to clearing the backlog. That is what the government has done. We are being very transparent about what that entails. We have processed all of those cases and indeed gone further than the original commitment. We’re up to 112,000 decisions made overall. As a result of that process, there are a small minority of cases which are complex and which, because of our rigorous standards, require further work. But nonetheless, it is a significant piece of work by Home Office officials to process such huge numbers in a short period of time while retaining our rigorous safety standard. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.55pm GMT block-time published-time 12.34pm GMT   Rishi Sunak is even being factchecked on small boats by Elon Musk (or at least by X, which is owned by Musk). This morning Sunak said in a post: I said that this government would clear the backlog of asylum decisions by the end of 2023. That’s exactly what we’ve done. enltrI said that this government would clear the backlog of asylum decisions by the end of 2023. That’s exactly what we’ve done. Over 112,000 cases are now cleared with a lower grant rate than last year, a key part of our plan to stop the boats. — Rishi Sunak (@RishiSunak) January 2, 2024 X has included “added context” saying: The backlog has not been cleared. UPDATE: The reference to Sunak being fact-checked by Musk was just frivolous levity (or attempted levity). Various readers have been in touch to point out that the added context function is just a feature of the site launched before he took it over. This is from one of them. It’s not quite right to say that Twitter has “added context” to Sunak’s tweet about boat crossings, and it’s misleading to imply that Twitter or Musk has had some role in “factchecking” it. The feature being used is Community Notes, where ordinary Twitter users submit and vote on context to add below tweets. This feature was introduced (before Musk’s tenure) in an effort to combat misinformation, and it is also frequently used to criticise Musk himself. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.12pm GMT block-time published-time 12.30pm GMT   Has Sunak really broken five 'promises' made in relation to tackling small boats?   Politicians like making firm pledges. For a party in government, a promise can have a galvanising effect on the civil service machinery, focusing attention on outcomes and ensuring stuff happens. For voters, it’s a signal that a leader shares their concerns (assuming it’s the right pledge). And when politicians keep their promises, they build up trust. But promises are also perilous because, if they get broken, policy failure becomes even more conspicuous. That is why politicians are generally quite cautious about making cast-iron commitments and why their pledges are normally heavily qualified. Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, says Rishi Sunak has broken five promises on small boats. (See 11.07am. ) By my count, she can only get to five by misrepresenting some pledges, or by treating policy aspirations as policy commitments. But, from a communications perspective, that does not really matter, because her thread on X this morning has successfully highlighted areas where Sunak’s performance on small boats has not lived up to expectations. For pedants and purists, here is an analysis of whether firm promises have been broken in these areas. Asylum backlog: Clearing the “legacy” asylum backlog was treated by the media and the government as a firm pledge, but when Sunak announced this in the Commons in December 2022  he said: “We expect to abolish the backlog of initial asylum decisions by the end of next year.” That “expect” was an attempt to leave wiggle room. Sunak clearly thinks his record, a massive increase in the rate at which claims are being processed (see 10.30am  ), is something to be proud of, but Cooper is right to point out that, because of the exemptions, the backlog has not been fully cleared. Asylum hotel use:  Sunak told MPs in December 2022 he wanted to end hotel use for asylum seekers, but he did not say when it would happen. He told the Commons  : We are spending £5.5m every day on using hotels to house asylum seekers. We must end this. As Cooper points out, this is not happening. Stopping the boats: Cooper says Sunak committed to stopping the boats in 2023 but, although this was one of his pledges for 2023 , at the press conference where he unveiled them, he made it clear that he was not saying this would actually happen in 2023.  In fact, he refused to say what the pledge actually meant; it would be for the public to judge , he said. All arrivals to be returned:  This is another topic where Sunak expressed a desire for something to happen without being specific about when. He told MPs  in December 2022: We will introduce new legislation to make it unambiguously clear that, if you enter the UK illegally, you should not be able to remain here. Instead, you will be detained and swiftly returned either to your home country or to a safe country where your asylum claim will be considered. As Cooper points out, Sunak is nowhere near achieving this. Small boats law:  The firmest pledge from Sunak on small boats came when he delivered his five pledges  this time last year, saying: We will pass new laws to stop small boats, making sure that if you come to this country illegally, you are detained and swiftly removed. If the pledge was “pass new laws”, he kept that, because the Illegal Migration Act became law. But, as Cooper points out, the Home Office has not implemented the key provisions, because they are reliant on the Rwanda deportation policy being lawful, which currently it’s not. But if you take the pledge as extending to the rest of the sentence, “making sure [etc]” – which is how a reasonable person would understand it – then it hasn’t been met. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.04pm GMT block-time published-time 11.55am GMT   Nigel Farage says Tories have 'failed' on small boats because 50,000 people have been granted asylum   If Rishi Sunak thought all anti-immigration rightwingers would welcome the announcement about the asylum application backlog this morning, he will be disappointed. Nigel Farage, the former leader of Ukip and the Brexit party, has expressed alarm about the number of people being granted asylum. (See 9.49am. ) enltrIn an effort to rush through the Asylum backlog, this morning @RishiSunak  boasts he has granted 50,000 new applications. The Conservatives have failed us all. — Nigel Farage (@Nigel_Farage) January 2, 2024 And GB News, the rightwing news channel where Farage is a presenter, has also focused its news story  on the number of asylum applications being granted. Farage does not have a role in frontline politics at the moment. But he in effect controls Reform UK  (the new version of the Brexit party) and he has repeatedly refused to deny suggestions that he is going to start being much more politically active as the election approaches. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.56pm GMT block-time published-time 11.07am GMT   Labour claims Sunak has broken five promises on tackling small boats    Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, has posted a thread on X this morning claiming that Rishi Sunak has broken five promises on immigration made for 2023. It starts here. enltrPM & Home Secretary claiming they’ve cleared the asylum backlog this morning. That’s just not true. It’s one of five Sunak broken promises on asylum & small boats this year - yet another year of Tory asylum chaos, of gimmicks instead of grip. Let’s look at the facts??(1/7) — Yvette Cooper (@YvetteCooperMP) January 2, 2024 PM & Home Secretary claiming they’ve cleared the asylum backlog this morning. That’s just not true. It’s one of five Sunak broken promises on asylum & small boats this year - yet another year of Tory asylum chaos, of gimmicks instead of grip. Let’s look at the facts??(1/7) BROKEN PROMISE 1: Sunak claims to have cleared the asylum backlog. Not true. Not even cleared “legacy backlog” - 4,500 cases not done, 17,000 “withdrawn” by the Home Office but they’ve no idea where those people are And rest of backlog DOUBLED this yr Total backlog 99k (2/7) BROKEN PROMISE 2: A yr ago, the PM claimed he would end asylum hotel use which was costing £6m a day. Instead it went up this year by 20% to 56,000, costing the British taxpayer more than £8m a day - and well over £2bn a year. (3/7) BROKEN PROMISE 3: Sunak said he would stop the boats this year, but 2023 was second highest on record; almost 30,000 made the journey, 60x higher than 5yrs ago. Criminal gangs undermine border security & put lives at risk yet smuggler convictions down 30% under Tories (4/7) BROKEN PROMISE 4: Sunak claimed everyone who arrived would be returned - Returns of failed asylum seekers are down 50% compared to last Labour government - Only 5% of Albanians who came on small boats to the UK have been returned - £400m failing Rwanda plan & no one sent (5/7) BROKEN PROMISE 5: Sunak promised a new small boats law. But Govt hasn’t brought it into force as they know it’s unworkable One of 3 failing new Tory laws on small boats. First is now partially suspended. Second mainly not implemented. Third (Rwanda) on hold due to Tory rows (6/7 Five broken promises. Gimmicks instead of grip. Failing to stop criminal gangs undermining border security, failing to clear backlog, end hotel use, implement returns or properly manage asylum system. With a record of failure like that, Rishi Sunak should stop the… boasts (7) block-time published-time 10.53am GMT  Following our interview with the new Ofsted chief inspector, Sir Martyn Oliver, and his announcement of a pause in inspections  to allow for improved training in mental health issues, here’s a response from Prof Julia Waters, the sister of Ruth Perry, the headteacher whose death last year set off calls for urgent reforms to the way Ofsted inspects schools in England. Ofsted badly needs a new approach from its leaders, so it is reassuring to know that the new chief inspector is starting his job with an understanding that there is a need for significant change. I look forward to meeting him later this week to discuss the key issues that my family, and many others, feel need to be addressed. And here is a response from ? Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers. This announcement shows that the new chief inspector has a greater understanding of the problem. Allowing time for training is a positive signal. Next, Sir Martyn needs to agree with the profession immediate steps that will bring sufficient confidence to allow time to develop much-needed long-term reform. I look forward discussing this with him this week. Here is the interview with Oliver.  Related:  ‘Teaching is deeply personal’: Ofsted’s new chief on inspections and schools’ struggles enltrPresenting #TomorrowsPapersToday  from: #TheGuardian Ofsted bows to pressure and halts inspections after head’s suicide For more newspapers visit: https://t.co/NNc1XQqHEw #buyanewspaper pic.twitter.com/AYcnPnsa7q  — The Press Room #TomorrowsPapersToday (@channel_tsc) January 1, 2024 block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.14pm GMT block-time published-time 10.30am GMT   Home Office says more than three times as many asylum applications processed in 2023 as in 2022   And here are some more of the details from the Home Office ’s report  this morning (see 9.19am  and 9.49am  ) on asylum claims. It is described as an “ad hoc statistical release”, which means it is not being published as part of the routine data reporting schedule. The Home Office says it has been released to support “the prime minister’s statement of 2 January 2024” – a reference to an article he has written for the Daily Express.  The number of initial asylum application decisions taken last year was more than three times as high as the figure for the previous year, the Home Office says. That is partly because there has been a big increase in the number of staff employed to deal with these cases. The Home Office says: Local provisional MI [management information data] shows that, in the four weeks from 20 November to 17 December 2023 there were 20,481 initial asylum decisions made. This number of decisions compares to a total of 20,039 decisions made in the whole of 2021. There were more than 112,138 initial asylum decisions made on asylum cases between 1 January and 28 December 2023. In the year 1 January to 31 December 2022 there were 31,766 initial decisions. But the number of applications considered dealt with because they have been withdrawn or considered not valid has also increased hugely, the Home Office says.  Withdrawn applications are almost three times as high as they were in 2022. The Home Office says: Of the 112,138 initial asylum decisions made between January and 28 December 2023, 35,119 were non-substantive decisions. In the year 1 January to 31 December 2022 there were 13,093 non-substantive decisions. Non-substantive decisions include withdrawn applications and administrative decisions (void and deceased).  Rajeev Syal, the Guardian’s home affairs editor, tells me: A claim is seen as withdrawn if an applicant fails to maintain contact with the Home Office, fails to complete an asylum questionnaire properly, or fails to attend a personal interview. When changes were made to the the definition of withdrawn claims over the summer, an unnamed Home Office source told the Guardian: “This is done to basically bring the backlog down. A lot of interviews were booked to withdraw as many claims as possible (if people didn’t turn up).” Some 602 small boats were detected crossing the Channel in 2023, compared with 1,110 in 2022, the Home Office says.  That implies crossings have almost halved. But people smugglers are using larger boats than in the past, and the number of individuals crossing the Channel on small boats last year was down by 36%. The number of operations to stop small boat crossings increased last year, the Home Office says.  It says: Based upon information provided by French authorities, the number of small boats prevented from crossing the Channel by the French have increased over the last year. The Home Office undertook 707 Organised Crime Group disruption activities between 1 October 2022 and 30 November 2023, compared to 554 between 1 October 2021 and 30 November 2022. These numbers will not include additional work aimed at organised crime groups by the National Crime Agency (NCA). The number of hotels being used to house asylum seekers fell from 398 at the end of October 2023 to 348 on 17 December, the Home Office says. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.20pm GMT block-time published-time 9.49am GMT   67% of asylum applications subject to initial decision in 2023 were granted, says Home Office   The Home Office has just published the data used to justify its overnight claim about having cleared the “legacy” asylum applications backlog. The report is here.  It says that, of the 112,138 application subject to an initial decision in 2023, 67% were granted. This refutes the suggestion repeatedly made by Suella Braverman when she was home secretary (for example, here  ) that most people crossing the Channel on small boats are not genuine asylum seekers. The Home Office paper says: Of the 112,138 initial asylum decisions, 77,019 were substantive decisions (51,469 grants and 25,550 refusals, which is a grant rate of 67%). This represents the highest annual number of substantive decisions on asylum cases made since 2002. 86,800 of these decisions were made on Legacy applications, with a further 25,338 decisions on Flow applications. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.53am GMT block-time published-time 9.32am GMT   Cleverly says spiking joke ‘clearly caused hurt’   In his interviews this morning James Cleverly, the home secretary, admitted that that a pre-Christmas “joke” he made about spiking his wife’s drink with a date rape drug could have distracted from his department’s work to tackle violence against women and girls. Ben Quinn has the full story here.  Related:  James Cleverly says spiking joke ‘clearly caused hurt’ block-time published-time 9.19am GMT   James Cleverly rejects claims Home Office wrong to say it has cleared legacy asylum claims backlog   Good morning and happy new year. Politics is not starting at full pelt this week – the Commons is not back until next week, and although Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer have visits scheduled for later this week, we’re not expecting to hear from them today – but James Cleverly, the home secretary, has been doing a media round, and the news is dominated by an argument about immigration policy. As it will be, no doubt, for most of the rest of 2024. Never mind; only 365 more days to go. Cleverly is doing interviews because the Home Office says it has found a pledge by Rishi Sunak that he has actually met: clearing the backlog for “legacy” asylum applications. As Rajeev Syal explains in his overnight story, experts say this is misleading, and that in fact the backlog has not been fully cleared.  Related:  Thousands of ‘legacy’ asylum cases awaiting decisions despite Sunak’s pledge Labour is also questioning the Home Office’s claim. This is what Stephen Kinnock, the shadow immigration minister, said last night. The asylum backlog has rocketed to 165,000 under the Tories – eight times higher than when Labour left office – and no slicing or renaming the figures can disguise that fact. Even their claims to have cleared the so-called ‘legacy backlog’ are false. Over 4,000 claims are unresolved and a disturbing 17,000 asylum seekers have simply been ‘withdrawn’ by the Tories from this legacy backlog, with ministers seeming to have no idea where they are and whether they are reapplying or disappearing into the underground economy. But on the Today programme, when Mishal Husain asked him why the Home Office was saying the legacy backlog target had been met when it hadn’t, Cleverly replied: Because it has. Because it has. Our commitment was to make sure we process those 92,000 legacy claims, predating 28 June 2022. They had not been assessed. Those people needed to be accommodated, they needed to be supported financially, and the prime minister committed to processing all those applications. Every single one of those applications has been processed. In fact, when Sunak made the commitment in the Commons in December 2022, he talked not just about processing claims, but about eliminating the backlog. “We expect to abolish the backlog of initial asylum decisions by the end of next year,” he told MPs. Cleverly has also faced questions for the first time about the controversy generated by the date rape joke  he made in private at a Christmas drinks reception in Downing Street. Asked about the comment, which led to calls for his resignation, Cleverly told Sky News that his apology was “heartfelt” and that his actions as a minister showed he took violence against women and girls very seriously. He told the programme: It was a joke that I made and of course you know I regret it and I apologised immediately, and that apology is heartfelt. But the point that I’ve made is that as home secretary I was the first home secretary to put forward legislation to toughen our ability to deal with spiking. My first visit as home secretary was to an investigation team investigating violence against women and girls, when I was foreign secretary I set a target that 80% of our aid has got to demonstrably have a positive effect for women and girls. I shouldn’t have said it and I apologised immediately … I’m sorry because it clearly caused hurt, it’s potentially distracted from the work we were doing to tackle spiking to help predominantly women who are the victims of spiking and I regret that. But I’m absolutely determined to continue the work that I’ve been doing for years. I will post more from his interviews shortly. There is not much on the agenda today, but at 9.30am the Home Office is publishing more figures relating to the asylum claims backlog and at 11.30am we have got a No 10 lobby briefing. If you want to contact me, do try the “send us a message” feature. You’ll see it just below the byline – on the left of the screen, if you are reading on a laptop or a desktop. This is for people who want to message me directly. I find it very useful when people message to point out errors (even typos – no mistake is too small to correct). Often I find your questions very interesting, too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either in the comments below the line; privately (if you leave an email address and that seems more appropriate); or in the main blog, if I think it is a topic of wide interest. block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.12am GMT Load-Date: January 2, 2024  End of Document
