   No-deal Brexit planning ‘crowded out’ efforts to prepare for pandemic The Guardian (London) June 13, 2023 Tuesday 2:40 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:3 Length: 781 words Byline: Robert Booth Social affairs correspondent Highlight: Covid inquiry hears that from 2018 planning for UK’s disorderly exit from EU ‘drained resources and capacity’ Body   Planning for a no-deal Brexit from 2018 “crowded out” government efforts to prepare for a pandemic and contributed to leaving the country unready, the first evidence session of the Covid public inquiry has heard. UK government pandemic planning failed to show “proper foresight” and “even at this stage, before hearing the evidence, it is apparent that we might not have been very well prepared at all”, Hugo Keith KC, counsel to the inquiry, said. Brexit no-deal planning from 2018 onwards “prevented some, or perhaps a majority of the improvements that central government itself understood were required to be made to resilience planning and preparedness”, Keith said. No-deal Brexit planning “drained resources and capacity”. Operation Yellowhammer , as the Brexit planning was known, caused the work of a new pandemic flu preparedness board to stall “because of the preoccupation with readiness for Brexit”, lawyers for the bereaved added. “Few real changes were made … leaving government to largely make up the plan as it went along, once Covid arrived finally,” said Pete Weatherby KC, representing the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group. As scores of bereaved families descended on the west London inquiry  into a pandemic that claimed at least 226,977 lives, Keith told the inquiry chair, Heather Hallett, that “extraordinarily” there appeared to have been very little debate inside government before the pandemic “of whether a lockdown might prove to be necessary in the event of a runaway virus, let alone how lockdown could be avoided”. Evidence unearthed so far may show that not enough people in the UK government considered the dangers of a coronavirus, Keith said. Proceedings began with an emotional 18-minute video in which bereaved people described their loved ones’ deaths and their devastating aftermath. Lady Hallett warned those present about its emotional weight and gave them a chance to step out. People spoke of losing loved ones in locked-down care homes, dying with Covid contracted in hospital and catching the virus while at work. One woman, who described her anger at not being able to dress her deceased father because he was in a body bag, said: “In order for us to move on, we need to know lessons [have been] learned, and the future generations will be safeguarded from the heartache we’ve had so far.” Keith told the inquiry: “There appears to be the failure to think through the potentially massive impact on education and the economy or [how to] try to control a runaway virus.” Keith also indicated the inquiry would make a judgment on pre-pandemic austerity, as the Trades Union Congress has urged. “If you conclude that as a country, we were insufficiently resilient and that in future, different political and financial choices may have to be made in order to render us better able to [deal with the] shock, you will want to say so,” he told Hallett. There had been planning for flu pandemics, but “fundamentally, in relation to significant aspects of the Covid-19 pandemic, we were taken by surprise,” he said. He listed the need for decisions on shielding, employment support, managing disruption to schools, borders, and pharmaceutical interventions and the profoundly unequal impact of the pandemic on vulnerable and marginalised people. “Few of those areas were anticipated, let alone considered in detail,” he said. Bruce Mann, a former director of the Cabinet Office’s civil contingencies secretariat and an expert witness to the inquiry, will say in his evidence in the coming days that “UK preparedness was wholly inadequate”, the inquiry heard. Weatherby said he expected the evidence “to show little or no ministerial leadership, a chaos of committees, which led to poor planning, and ultimately a reactive rather than proactive response to the virus”. He said there was a lack of transparency over pandemic planning and said the former health secretary Matt Hancock was advised that publishing information about Exercise Cygnus, a 2016 flu pandemic planning scheme, “would lead to criticism of lack of preparedness”. “If the last three-and-a-half years have taught us anything, proper planning, adequate resourcing and swift action saves lives,” he said. “From the families’ perspective, it appears that the UK had none of those three things. They want to know why. And they want it to change.” Keith warned about the urgency of ensuring “that our systems of preparedness are ready”, highlighting the current prevalence of bird flu with “extremely high case fatality rates”. “Fortuitously, they haven’t yet sustained human-to-human transmission,” he said. “Let us say they never do, but the possibility cannot be ruled out.” The inquiry continues. Load-Date: June 13, 2023  End of Document
