   No-deal Brexit fears hampered Covid preparation; inquiry hears how two issues clashed EU talks disrupted virus precautionary work Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 29, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 465 words Byline: PAUL CARGILL Body   SCOTLAND'S pandemic preparations before Covid were hampered by fears over the impact of a no-deal Brexit, an inquiry heard yesterday. A board set up to work on how to deal with the scenario had to suspend meetings for more than six months prior to the coronavirus outbreak because of warnings over the effects of leaving the EU without a deal. Gillian Russell, a senior civil servant who was the director of safer communities in Scotland between 2015 and 2020, told the UK Covid-19 Inquiry that the Scottish Government Pandemic Flu Preparedness Board (PFPB) made "disappointing" progress on plans prior to the pandemic. Kate Blackwell KC told of a Scottish Government simulation of a flu pandemic in 2016, named Operation Silver Swan, and recommendations made to improve readiness to deal with a pandemic. She said a number of meetings were subsequently held by health officials to review progress on the delivery of recommendations as well as further calls for improvements made following another UK-wide pandemic rehearsal, called Operation Cygnus, one year later. Ms Blackwell said many of the recommendations had still not been fully implemented by June 2019 and asked Russell why minutes of a resilience team meeting held to review progress stated work to deliver them had been "paused". Russell replied: "In October 2018 we were presented with the Yellowhammer planning assumptions for a no-deal Brexit and they were significantly challenging. A decision was taken that priority should be given to working through how we would mitigate significant risks that would immediately crystalise on a no-deal Brexit. "That took up a huge amount of strategic capacity across many parts of Scottish Government, including the resilience co-ordination of a lot of that work." Ms Blackwell then asked Russell why it appeared the group initially met every two months then stopped meeting altogether between November 2018 and June 2019. Russell cited behind-thescenes plans for leaving the EU as the reason. Asked if there had also been a problem with resources, Russell added: "There's a finite resource in Government of people with certain skills and expertise." She went on to explain that employees with expertise on subjects such as drug supplies would have been involved in pandemic preparedness but had to consider the effect a no-deal Brexit would have on supplies. She said: "There was a lot of work across Government to try to mitigate and understand those risks." Noting some outstanding work of pandemic preparedness was then later described in documents as being dealt with under the term "business as usual", Ms Blackwell asked: "It was a disappointing response, wasn't it, to recommendations from both Silver Swan and Cygnus?" Russell replied: "It was disappointing but other factors came into play." Load-Date: June 29, 2023  End of Document
