   No-deal Brexit threat hit pandemic planning i-news June 29, 2023 SC1 Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 15 Length: 379 words Byline: Paul Cargill Body   A board set up to work on Scotland's pandemic preparedness had to suspend meetings for more than six months before the outbreak of Covid-19 because of warnings over the effects of a no-deal Brexit, an inquiry has heard. Gillian Russell, the director of Safer Communities in Scotland between 2015 and 2020, told the UK Covid-19 Inquiry that the Scottish Government Pandemic Flu Preparedness Board (PFPB) had made "disappointing" progress on its plans prior to the pandemic. The inquiry heard the board was commissioned in the summer of 2017 by the then deputy first minister, John Swinney, who is due to give evidence to the inquiry today, and the group was formed "to lead on Scotland's interests at UK level and further develop preparedness in Scotland". The discussion came after Kate Blackwell KC raised the subject of the Scottish Government's simulation of a flu pandemic in 2016 named Operation Silver Swan, and a series of recommendations made after the exercise to improve the nation's readiness to deal with a pandemic. She told the inquiry a number of meetings were subsequently held by health officials to review progress on the delivery of those recommendations as well as further calls for improvements made following another UK-wide pandemic rehearsal called Operation Cygnus one year later. Ms Blackwell pointed out many of the recommendations had still not been fully implemented by June 2019, however, and went on to ask Ms Russell why minutes of a resilience team meeting held that month to review progress stated work to deliver them had been "paused". Ms Russell replied: "In October 2018 we were presented with the 'Yellowhammer' planning assumptions for a no-deal Brexit and they were significantly challenging. "A decision was taken that priority should be given to working through how we would mitigate the significant risks that would immediately crystallise on a no-deal Brexit. "That took up a huge amount of strategic capacity across many parts of Scottish Government, including the resilience co-ordination of a lot of that work." Turning to the formation of the PFPB, Ms Blackwell asked Ms Russell why the group initially met every two months then stopped between November 2018 and June 2019. Ms Russell again cited planning for a no-deal Brexit as the cause. Load-Date: June 29, 2023  End of Document
