   Picardo: "Gibraltar and all its residents are fed up with Brexit and its consequences". CE Noticias Financieras English September 9, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1481 words Body   The humid easterly breeze stirs the red and white flags that festoon every corner of Gibraltar these days. Next Sunday the 32,600 Gibraltarians celebrate their National Day. There will be a party, although the clouds that this Thursday were hooked to the Rock are as real as metaphorical. The colony has been stuck since December 2020 in a post-Brexit transitional period, which it had rejected by 95% in the 2016 referendum. At that time, Spain and the United Kingdom believed they could reach a treaty to tear down the fence and start a new era of relations. But, almost three years later, the pact is still stuck, and Spain and Gibraltar are going through one of their most rarefied periods, with incidents in the waters surrounding the Rock and at the border. An agreement does not seem to be in sight, after the Spanish government took office after the 23-J elections and the Gibraltarian government does the same before the end of the year. In this scenario, the socialist Fabian Picardo (Gibraltar, 1972), Gibraltar's chief minister, faces his most decisive moment. Question. We are on the way to three years and negotiations are still open, what is happening? Answer. We have put all the meat on the grill the four parties: the European Union, United Kingdom, which are those who will sign the treaty, Spain and Gibraltar, those who are involved by the reality of the border crossing with La Linea. We have been clear from the first moment that sovereignty is not on the table. We have also put all the good faith to try to solve the technical and substantive problems. Having done all that, what we find is that this is not as easy as frying an egg. There is a lot of technical stuff that we have to unpack to bring solutions that are satisfactory and protect all parties, that protect sovereignty for all parties as well. The European Union is a technical legal animal and we have to make sure it works. The New Year's Eve [2020] agreement was one of principle and it took us months, but with this one we ran into the reality of how difficult it is to do it technically. Q. And what was the last point at which you ran aground? R. Everything that is going to survive the politician has to be anchored in the utmost respect for the democratic process. When the President of the Spanish Government calls elections, the process implies that Spain can no longer reach new compromises because it has to respect a possible different political point of view. At the moment there is a government in office, when it changes, the negotiation can continue. In addition, in Gibraltar there must be elections before Christmas, during the autumn, and that will also be a time when the government of Gibraltar, although at a technical level will be able to answer any questions, we will not be able to be negotiating. Q. How is the public following this wait, and do you sense that they are fed up with it? R. The citizens of Gibraltar appreciate that their government is putting all available resources to reach this agreement. It is very complicated and I think people appreciate how hard we have been working. We also appreciate very much that from Spain there has been such a dialogue and positive attitude that has allowed there to be fluidity at the border, although there are actors who try to interfere and, from time to time, problems arise. The public appreciates that we have not been doomed to a hard Brexit because of the work we have been doing. We are trying to avoid the worst of Brexit, but if you ask me, I think Gibraltar and all its residents are sick to death of Brexit and its consequences. P. For months, there was talk that a sticking point was in the presence of Spanish police at the airport, is that element resolved? R. All the journalists who have tried to get some detail of the negotiation out of one of the four parties have not succeeded, and this morning I have not yet drunk whiskey [laughs], so I am going to refer to the position we have all taken: the detail of the negotiation is not of interest for us to go breaking it down. The fact that I am not answering you does not mean that it is an issue that has been resolved. The most complicated thing is the least politically juicy; in the very technical matters at the European, British and Gibraltarian levels, we need fewer politicians and more lawyers. Q. What Spanish presence would Gibraltar be willing to have in its territory? R. To the same Gibraltarian presence that Spain would be willing to tolerate in its territory. It is not an issue that is causing us havoc in the negotiation. We are dealing more with the very technical issues of immigration than with those issues, because we have found in the negotiation different very inventive solutions to issues that might seem politically juicy, that obviate the problems that the citizens think might be created. And so I congratulate all four parties because they have been ingenious in finding solutions that obviate political problems. P. If the European Union and the United Kingdom managed to reach an agreement for Northern Ireland, what makes Gibraltar so different to take so long? R. I am very optimistic that we are going to have an even better agreement. Gibraltar's problem with Spain goes back 300 years, Northern Ireland's has been going on for 100 years. We are very close. If there is political change in Spain or in Gibraltar, it would take longer, but if there is not in both, as it seems in Spain and I hope here, it will be easier. P. In recent weeks there have been incidents in the waters surrounding Gibraltar with Customs Surveillance and fishing vessels. They are not new clashes, but the response of the Spanish Foreign Ministry in its note verbale does scale a degree of discomfort, what did you think? R. We have notes verbales to paper the tunnels of Gibraltar. And I imagine that in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs there will be notes verbales from the United Kingdom to paper the ministry and the Almudena Cathedral. But the important thing is the human relationship between politicians and technicians who have to ensure that the negotiation continues and that every day the neighboring territories, without going into what kind of territories we are, assure their respective citizens that they have the ability to flow freely, according to the laws, but streamlining the movement. The most important thing is that when there are moments of tension, where before there was no recourse to try to resolve something, now there is the opportunity to pick up a phone to talk or chat and seek a solution. As everyone who comes here knows, these are things that, unfortunately, happen all the time. Those moments we are going to be able to resolve forever with this treaty, if we can finalize it. I refer to the words of José Manuel Albares [Spanish foreign minister] who said, as I had said before, that these incidents are the reason why we should continue to try to have a treaty, not a reason why we should not pursue it. P. The various parties are again talking about ownership of the waters or sovereignty. These are just the vexing issues that were announced to be left out of the negotiation to focus on the practical. Why does the debate now seem to be turning to those positions? R. Neither one side nor the other has changed its basic position on these issues, which are the most burning ones. But what divides us remains at 0.01%. We agree on much more, and spending our time trying to refine and streamline how we do what we agree on is better than repeating to each other the things we disagree on. However, at times there are political statements, not necessarily from the Government of Spain but from some political actors in the area, which require Gibraltar to answer in a clear and unequivocal way. Q. Are we not witnessing then live a justification of each party to win the story of the possible disaster in the negotiations? R. The one who has the most to lose if this negotiation fails is me. I wrote to Minister [Arancha] Gonzalez Laya [former Spanish Foreign Minister] proposing an agreement, I have been leading the Gibraltar team. I have left a lot behind politically, professionally and personally, and as long as I have political blood in my veins and have the capacity to be involved in this negotiation, I will always be looking for an agreement. Q. How do you think the treaty can influence the elections in Gibraltar and your campaign? R. The people of Gibraltar know that their government has represented them with the utmost energy, good faith and with a very tough backbone of steel. And so they have every confidence that we at that negotiating table are looking at the interests of Gibraltar, that none of the other parties have to lose, that we all win and that's a very difficult exercise. I think that is something that the vast majority of Gibraltarians will value very favorably at the time of voting. Load-Date: September 10, 2023  End of Document
