   Putting minnows up against top rugby nations is a recipe for humiliation Aberdeen Press and Journal October 5, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 26 Length: 1430 words Byline: Struan Nimmo Body   Sir, - The format of the current Rugby World Cup leaves much to be desired. Romania have been defeated 82-0 by Ireland, 72-0 by South Africa and 84-0 by Scotland. What is the point of them being there to suffer such humiliations? We could say the same of Spain and Portugal, neither of which are rugby-playing nations. If Romania wishes to promote rugby in a football- mad country it's going the wrong way about it. Quite who benefits from such cricket scores is open to question, certainly not the victors whose players can only add to their try scores in Test records. Surely the lesser rugby- playing nations should have a play-off situation with the best two finalists admitted to the group sides on the World Cup. That could possibly obviate the kind of humiliating scores we are currently viewing, In addition, after Scotland's opening match against South Africa, why did they have to wait two weeks until their next game? It's absolute nonsense. In the football World Cup, there are few instances where teams lose by seven, eight or nine goals. In the majority of games most are relatively well matched. I doubt that teams in that competition would have to wait two weeks between fixtures, so why did our national rugby side have to wait two weeks for a competitive fixture ? Fifa's financial record and their ramifications leave much to be desired and are still under investigation, but at least they can - to a certain extent - organise an international tournament regardless of where the hosts may be located. John Reid, Keith. We won't see any of the oil benefits Sir, - I write with regard to your leader column on September 30 in which you say: "Offshore chiefs say Rosebank is key to giving the industry time to pivot while also ensuring energy and job security." What arrant rubbish. So, maybe they (and certainly Sir Ian Wood) do say that, but it doesn't make it true, and you don't have to repeat it. It is perfectly well known that the oil and gas will belong to whoever gets the licence and so whatever comes out of the ground will be sold by them on world markets; we won't see any of it and it won't help energy or job security one bit. Furthermore, it is not about helping the British economy. It is about Rishi Sunak aiding and rewarding his cronies in the city. We've had 50 years of this. Don't you think that is long enough for even the dimmest of us to get tired and to have seen through it by now? James Murray, Aberdeen. Ruining ourselves for no good reason Sir, - The letters from Lesley Ellis, Damien Goodwin and Jonathan Russell (Press and Journal, October 2) all make the assumption that, for the UK and the planet, our decarbonising, at enormous cost, will be effective in preventing adverse global climate changes. How do they know that decarbonisation could or would work for any nation? No mechanism has been published for such a financially and societally risky, damaging policy. No evidence exists that decarbonising is effective in influencing the global or local climate Over 70% of the planet's greenhouse gases, believed to be the climate villains, are emitted from nations dead set against decarbonising. These include China, India and many more. Therefore, if that drastically ruinous process proved ineffective, what could be done next? Decarbonising is doomed to failure without international compliance with the UK's and UN's climate committees' advice. For the trusting faithful to assume that our "good" example would be followed by the sceptical governments is just pie in the sky. Therefore, such a ruinous policy, that drains scarce resources from defence, education, health and maintaining our nation's infrastructure, yet is guaranteed to fail, is obviously unjustifiable. Charles Wardrop, Perth. Investigate these delays to ferries Sir, - The costs of two CalMac ferries have risen yet again and the delivery date for Glen Rosa has been pushed back to May 2025.Successive SNP transport ministers have betrayed islanders time and time again, and it is disgraceful that they will have to wait even longer for one of these vessels to be delivered, with Glen Rosa set to be seven years late. These ferries must be delivered without any further delay and with costs to the public purse kept to a minimum. Humza Yousaf must agree to a full independent inquiry into this shameful waste of taxpayers' money. Councillor Alastair Redman, Kintyre and the Islands ward. Wise words about our energy wealth Sir, - The statement "There are few places in the world as well positioned to lead the green energy transformation as Scotland, with its abundant sources of renewable energy" could have come from the pen of Herbert Petrie. Mr Petrie captains the nationalist propaganda team whose letters are a regular feature in The P&J. But on this occasion it was an excellent piece on September 27, with no mention of the divisive "I" word, by Andy Sloan. Mr Sloan is a professional in the field of engineering, environmental science and economics who sees our country's hills, valleys and lochs as more than just a tourist attraction but as the heart of an enterprise to boost energy storage. He concludes with his belief that Scotland "has all the ingredients to become a renewable energy and storage superpower". But for this to happen a necessary ingredient is public support. There's little evidence that this will be forthcoming if judged by many of those who give their opinions in The P&J. Certainly not David Philip, who in his letter of September 30 stated that Scotland's wealth of resources do not exist except in the mind of a nationalist standard bearer. No doubt Mr Petrie over-eggs the pudding but is he any more guilty than those who believe Scotland somehow differ from neighbouring countries of similar size who take their place in the world as successful independent nations? Ivan W Reid, Laurencekirk. Deficit deniers must face facts Sir, - Trying to make any sense of Willie Dunbar's piece (Letters, September 25) is no mean task when he appears to quote various figures plucked from GERS with little or no understanding what they actually mean - no doubt due to a blinkered conviction that somehow we in Scotland are being shortchanged by the successive UK governments. So to help him and his cohorts let me quote directly from the Scottish Government's own published figures which state that during 2022-23 the tax revenue generated in Scotland (including North Sea oil revenues) amounted to £87.5bn but we benefited during the same period from a total of £106bn in public spending. Furthermore the Scottish budget for 2023 to 2024 has been set at £59.7bn and a detailed breakdown of their spending plans can be seen on the Scottish Government's own website. This makes a nonsense of Mr Dunbar's claim that only a fraction of taxes raised are under Scottish Government's control. In other words if we generate roughly the same revenue per person as England (including oil) but spend 25% more on public services (not disputed) obviously our fiscal deficit will be proportionally much higher and add to our accumulated debt which is currently subsumed by the UK Government. Finally, as there is no economic argument for indy, let me assure him that provided correspondents like him continue to be deficit deniers and refuse to confront issues on currency, hard borders, state pensions and much more, people like me will "perpetually" take him and others to task. Ian Lakin, Aberdeen. Another dividend' thanks to Brexit Sir, - Even after the imposition of Brexit I've always felt at home in Europe: a European travelling on his own continent. Imagine my chagrin when that sentiment was challenged during a recent trip to Rhodes. I visited the acropolis at Lindos where pensioners are, on provision of documentary evidence, admitted at half-price. When I presented mine, the lady attendant explained "Europeans only" qualified. "But I'm European" I protested. With a rueful shrug, she responded: "Brexit." Albeit in a small way, I'd stumbled upon another downside of Brexit. The extra six euros I paid was nothing to the billions squandered on this self-defeating project, but the principle remains as I incurred an unnecessary additional cost. In Turkey we found the Turks, confronted with a rapidly depreciating domestic currency, ever-eager to get their hands on dollars or euros but not pounds sterling. My experience represented a cameo of the diminution in Britain's international status since Brexit. But when will our senior politicians see sense and initiate a policy to rejoin the EU with its myriad benefits? Whatever happens, I remain resolutely European. Ian D McCormick, Aboyne. Load-Date: October 5, 2023  End of Document
