   Question Time Brexiteer reveals jaw-dropping reason she voted Leave The National (Scotland) June 23, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 472 words Byline: Hamish Morrison Body   A QUESTION Time member has revealed the astonishing reason she backed Brexit - because German roofers went on top of buildings without safety guards. The woman, who appeared on Thursday night-s Question Time Brexit special, said she felt Britain was following European laws not adhered to by other nations - specifically the Working at Height Regulations. The woman said: -The reason that I wanted to come out of Brexit was because we seemed to keep all the rules and many foreign countries didn-t. I-m just talking about people that go up on roofs, for one thing. -We kept-when they brought the rules in about the safety guards, we took that on board. But when you went to France or Germany or something, they were all up on their roofs with nothing. -And we were paying, you know, the cost of having to do it the right way but they weren-t. And that-s one of the biggest reasons why I voted to come out.- #BBCQT Brexit Special audience member is "not unhappy" with how Brexit is going, because at least now "people in France and Germany" don't "go up on their roofs with nothing". ~AA --\xEF pic.twitter.com/M1Denj5LMk - Best for Britain (@BestForBritain) June 22, 2023 She was then asked by Fiona Bruce: -And are you happy with how things are working for you at the moment?- She replied: -Um, I-m not unhappy. There-s a lot of things that aren-t right. I just think we need to really get to grips with where we are, what we want and just keep to it and not keep changing our minds every five minutes. "That-s what I hate it when they keep changing their minds.- READ MORE: Tory ministers refuse to appear on Question Time Brexit special Working at height rules, which mandate among other things safety guards on roofs to protect workers, remain part of UK law as one of the thousands of pieces of legislation kept as part of a workaround to prevent chaos immediately after Brexit. They were introduced in 2004 by the Health and Safety Executive and the last time the regulations were brought up in the House of Commons - by SNP MP Alison Thewliss, the chair of the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Working at Height - was in the context of the EU law bonfire which had been planned by the Government. Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch indicated during that exchange the rules were being kept as she walked back plans to scrap en masse swathes of European legislation. The Brexit special of Question Time included only Leave voters in the audience and was filmed in Clacton-On-Sea, Essex, the most strongly pro-Brexit part of Britain. We revealed previously how no Government ministers had made themselves available to go on the show to defend leaving the European Union. The Scottish Government published a report on Friday marking the seven-year anniversary of the Brexit referendum to demonstrate the damage it had caused to Scotland-s economy. Load-Date: July 21, 2023  End of Document
