   Relations with government 'fragile', says Lord Frost East Anglian Daily Times June 28, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: THE BUSINESS;BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 325 words Byline: SARAH CHAMBERS Body   Boris Johnson's top Brexit negotiator has defended Brexit - but admitted relations between business and government are "fragile" as he addressed an Ipswich dinner event. Lord David Frost - the former prime minister's chief negotiator and Europe adviser from 2019 to 2021 - told Suffolk business bosses that failing to deliver Brexit would have been politically disastrous. "Brexit is done - now we need to move on," he told members of Ipswich and Suffolk Business Club as they gathered at Milsons Kesgrave Hall on June 16 to hear him speak. He defended the importance of seeing the process through. "I'm most proud of what Boris and I did along with a few others like Dominic Cummings in those awful months of 2019 after we came to power and the entire country felt on the verge of a nervous breakdown. "The constitution was blocked, nobody could get Brexit done and it seemed like Parliament couldn't agree on anything. "I think it would have been disastrous if we'd not been able to deliver the referendum result and risk a second referendum. "So I think it was constitutionally and politically crucial that we were able to cut through all that and show that when you vote for something in this country it happens and politicians act accordingly." But he suggested that the relatioship between government and business had suffered. "I think the relationship between government and business has got fragile in recent years and something needs to be done about it," he said. "With that said, businesses should be clear about what they want, identify their main issues and get them into government." Toby Kramers, chairman of Ipswich Suffolk Business Club (ISBC), said Lord Frost gave members a fascinating insight. "To be able to host Lord David Frost, whose career has such great impact in the field of business, has been an absolute pleasure. I found it fascinating to hear his insights across his work across Brexit, and I'm certain our members did too," he said. Graphic    Lord Frost, the UK's chief Brexit negotiator, in Ipswich Image: IPSWICH AND SUFFOLK BUSINESS CLUB Load-Date: June 28, 2023  End of Document
