   Remainers warned of a xenophobic, illiberal post-Brexit Britain. But it is Europe that's lurching to the far Right Mail on Sunday (London) July 17, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 16 Length: 1005 words Byline: DOMINIC LAWSON Body   YOU might recall the opinion expressed persistently by so many in this country, appalled when the UK voted to leave the EU: we had demonstrated that the British were narrow-mindedly obsessed with immigration, a reactionary island of 'Little Englanders' now morally detached from a Continent that represented a more enlightened, transnational approach. Now look: across the European Union, parties described as 'far Right' and 'populist' are either in government or poised to become so ? from the Finns Party in the far north to Brothers of Italy in the south. Their rhetoric is far harsher ? across a range of social issues, not just migration ? than anything our own Conservative Government has espoused, either before or after the Brexit vote. In Greece, an offshoot of an actual neo-Nazi party has gained 12 parliamentary seats, under the guidance of a man serving a prison sentence. Collapse Philip Cunliffe, professor of international relations at University College London, observed last week in an article for the Leftwing New Statesman: 'After Brexit, Britain was supposed to float adrift of our liberal and progressive neighbours, as we became a gloomy island buffeted by storms of imperial nostalgia, xenophobia and nativism. 'Not only would the British economy collapse, we were told that the venerable institutions of British parliamentary democracy would rapidly degenerate into irresponsible Right-wing extremism ? yet barely three years after Britain formally withdrew from the EU, it is Europe that is lurching to the Right.' One of Dr Cunliffe's conclusions is: 'The fact that British parliamentary government could not survive except by enacting the outcome of the 2016 referendum, shows that Brexit offered a historic opportunity to restore national-level representative democracy as against multinational diktat.' Speaking of multinational diktats, one reason for the rise of the Right in the EU member states is the way that they have, at various times, been told they must fall in with 'migrant quotas' which the parliaments of some of the individual nations find unacceptable. This first happened at the height of the migration crisis caused by the Syrian civil war, when the EU forced through mandatory quotas, even though its own treaties had supposedly given member states a veto in such matters. Something similar is happening again, with Poland bridling at the suggestion that it should pay what amounts to a fine of (EURO)20,000 for each migrant it refuses to take as part of any quota. The Polish government pointed out that it had allowed almost 7 million Ukrainian refugees into its country, and expressed its opposition to 'the attempt to introduce mechanisms for the forced relocation of illegal economic migrants at the European Union level'. But it's completely understandable why countries such as Italy and Greece, most exposed to sea-borne migration from Africa and the Middle East, should seek to get others within the EU 'family' to relieve them of some of the burden. And in Germany, as Saturday's Mail pointed out in a feature on the rise of the European far Right, the Alternative für Deutschland party first surged during the 2015 crisis and now seems poised to reach levels of support which would make it difficult to prevent them becoming part of a ruling coalition after the next election. Bemoaning these developments, in a Guardian article with a headline referring to a 'Europe-wide struggle against neofascism', the former PM Gordon Brown exclaims: 'Who is not to say that the Brexit slogan "Take back control" will not become Madame LePen's path to power?' In fact, the apparent inability of our own government to stem the tide of boats, commandeered by people smugglers to take their clients across the Channel, must now be confounding Britons who thought that 'take back control' applied especially to our borders. This explains why voters are much more exasperated by the cross-Channel boats than they are by the vastly bigger overall increase in (legal) net migration over the past couple of years. It is not so much absolute numbers that worry people ? there is great sympathy for the Ukrainian women and children who have arrived here with visas, or for Hong Kong citizens with British Overseas Passports fleeing Beijing's tyranny ? but the sense that something is 'out of control' or that our laws are being mocked. By the way, the slogan 'Take back control' was never just about migration, but about our laws (and parliamentary sovereignty) more generally. Which is why there were also a large number of socialists who backed Brexit. As one such, Dr Richard Johnson of Queen Mary, University of London, observed in the latest issue of The Critic: joining what was then the EEC 'took away from the UK government some core executive functions ? state aid and regional development were now in the hands of the European Commission, who, unlike the British government, did not depend on the majority of the House of Commons for continued political legitimacy'. Motive Dr Johnson would have been among the 49 per cent of Leave voters who in 2016 told Ashcroft polls that their main motive was 'the principle that decisions about the UK should be taken by the UK'. A significantly smaller proportion (33 per cent) said their main reason was 'to regain control over immigration and borders'. Should Keir Starmer become our next prime minister, it might seem to bear out the point that the UK is going 'Left', while the allegedly more enlightened EU is heading in the opposite direction. But it's not so simple. While Starmer, in one of his 'ten pledges' to Labour party members during his 2019 leadership campaign, promised to 'defend free movement as we leave the EU', he has comprehensively reversed that. He now says a Labour government will never rejoin the European single market ? the very thing which guaranteed the 'free movement' of peoples. The Labour leader may not be someone whose pledges are worth whatever paper they are written on. But he knows which way the political wind is blowing. Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
