   Rishi Sunak tries to resuscitate a Conservative Party resigned to electoral defeat CE Noticias Financieras English October 4, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1171 words Body   It is a textbook trick. When the party's acronym suffers irreversible wear and tear, you have to hide the acronym and make the candidate shine. The presence on stage at the Conservative Party Congress in Manchester of Akshata Murthy, Rishi Sunak's wife, to introduce the prime minister pursued the presidential tone of an American-style political convention. "Rishi, you know that betting on the right decisions, in the long run, is hard. But it's what you have to do. You don't know how proud your daughters and I are of you," said the daughter of Narayana Murthy, the Indian billionaire who started the digital services empire Infosys. The British First Lady introduced in her warm words to "Rishi" the slogan with which the current Conservative leader intends to resuscitate a party resigned to future electoral defeat and split between the hard wing, the moderates and the faithful: Long-Term Decisions for a Brighter Future. The UK general election is due in January 2025 at the latest, but the buzz in recent weeks, since the political course resumed after the summer, suggests an early April. All the announcements made by Sunak over the last few weeks, including those incorporated into his closing speech at the congress, involve the same triple political juggling act: challenging the establishment (quite a purpose for a Conservative Party that has been in power for 13 years); presenting himself as the candidate of change; and injecting a mixture of populism and technocracy into his decisions to reverse ongoing projects or to announce new ones. "Wherever we are presented with a false consensus of public opinion, we will challenge it. Where special interests try to prevail over the needs of the majority of citizens, we will stop them. And where common sense is under organized attack, we will defend it," Sunak assured his people. And everyone present understood his strategy, even if many still view it with some skepticism. False consensus? Sunak blames the inertia dragged on for years for some of the decisions that have cost the British public purse the most, wrapped up in a supposed understanding between Conservatives and Labour. Such as the HS2 infrastructure project, launched by Gordon Brown's government in 2009 to connect London and the north of England at high speed. Work began in 2017. They barely made it to Birmingham. Its initial budget of more than 42 billion euros was doubled. Its final phase, projected for 2029, was delayed to 2033. Against the wishes of many of his own, Sunak has cancelled the next phases, to Manchester and Leeds, to put the budgeted money into new rail and road schemes between the east and west of the country. "I already know I will be attacked for this decision. They will say it shows a lack of ambition," Sunak has told the Conservatives. "People in the party whom I respect will oppose it. But believe me, there is nothing ambitious about continuing to pour more and more money into the wrong project. There is no long-term planning if you ignore where the real infrastructure needs are," the prime minister asserted. The same arguments of "false consensus" have been used by Sunak to defend his decision to delay a large part of the commitments made by the British government in the fight against climate change. He presents as "brave" decisions, which have the support of the people and will help ease the pockets of drivers and households, rollbacks that, according to polls, do not even have the backing of Conservative voters. Smoke-free minors for the rest of their lives The only way for Sunak - a candidate neither his party's grassroots nor the voters chose - to claim the attention of a citizenry saturated after more than a decade of conservatism was to present an avalanche of promises suggesting the long term. Alongside the infrastructure plan to develop, from east to west, the impoverished north of England, the Prime Minister has promised reforms to improve the efficiency of the National Health Service; he has assured that there will be more rigor in the distribution of social benefits to force their beneficiaries to return to the labor market; he has announced a revolution in the UK education system, with a system similar to the International Baccalaureate that will force all students to study mathematics and English language until the age of 18; and he has launched the surprise and star measure of the congress: the smoking ban for minors, from the age of 14 and for the rest of their lives. A measure similar to the one inaugurated in this line by the New Zealand Government. "I propose that, in the future, we increase year by year the legal age for smoking. That way, a 14-year-old will no longer be able to buy cigarettes for the rest of his or her life," Sunak explained. With this idea, by imposing a ban on the sale of tobacco to anyone born on or after January 1, 2009, and increasing the legal smoking age (18) by one year each year, the habit could be completely eliminated among young people by 2040. Aware that the most liberal sector of his party will gnash its teeth at such a prohibitive measure, Sunak announced that, when the time comes, he will not impose voting discipline. For the moment, he has managed to impose the direction of a new national debate. Brexit and immigration Rishi Sunak never misses an opportunity to remind his supporters that he was an early advocate of the supposed virtues of Brexit. And despite the disappointment that that divorce with the EU has provoked, both among the party's hardline Eurosceptics - who always pursued a more drastic and neoliberal break - and among moderates, the prime minister continues to wave that flag as a promise of optimism. "Since we left the single market, we have grown faster than France or Germany, not in spite of Brexit, but thanks to Brexit," he assured in his speech, with an argument that will lead more than one economist to arch his eyebrow. Sunak defended his new policy against irregular immigration, which includes future deportations to Rwanda, floating prisons to house those arriving on the shores of England and huge legal hurdles to apply for asylum. Without employing the tough language of his home secretary, Suella Braverman, the prime minister has sounded just as defiant against international laws that hold back his aims, such as the European Convention on Human Rights. "I believe that our strategy is in line with our international commitments. But I assure you that I will do whatever it takes to stop the arrival of the boats on our shores," Sunak pledged. The Conservative congress in Manchester has been overshadowed by the hard wing of the party, and by messages of extreme populism that show the drift of the party since Brexit inoculated that poison among its ranks and voters. Sunak has tried to drink from all sources: Brexit and populism; technocracy and modernity. And he has run the risk of leaving Congress even more blurred than he entered. Follow all the international information on Facebook and X, or in our weekly newsletter. Load-Date: October 5, 2023  End of Document
