   Rosslare Europort and Wexford's wind energy potential key to meeting South East's economic challenges Wexford People (Ireland) September 10, 2023  Copyright 2023 INM plc All Rights Reserved  Length: 1696 words Body   The importance of a fully developed Rosslare Europort and wind energy off the Wexford coast were highlighted as being key to the success of the south east's economy, at a wide ranging debate at this year's Kennedy Summer School. Following a video presentation about the Maritime Area Regulatory Authority (MARA) and Trinity Wharf, speakers discussed the challengers and opportunities that faced the region with Marianne Barkan-Cowdy of the French Embassy stating that Brittany ports have a particularly strong interest in building business and further links with Rosslare Europort and the French Embassy have plans to open a consulate office in Rosslare. She spoke of how Rosslare Europort has grown so quickly and of how relations between Ireland and France have developed following Brexit. "Ireland has become our closest geographical neighbour and we have been starting to make this a political reality. A joint French and Irish action plan was signed in 2021 when President Macron came to Ireland." Ms Barkan-Cowdy said the strong historic links between Wexford and Normandy should be developed ahead of the millennium anniversary in 2027. "It's only the beginning. A new honourary consulate will be appointed to the Wexford region in the coming months," she said, adding that Danone has been an employer in Co Wexford for many years. Among those present in the crowd were local secondary students. SETU President Prof Veronica Campbell said the technological university are driving and aiming for the region to foster innovation as one of their strategic goals to reduce brain drain from the region.  "We are deeply committed to connecting with businesses across the south east." She said 60pc of people living in the south east go on to third level education outside of their home region. "Many of these people do not return," she said, adding that SETU plan to have courses in veterinary, pharmacy and education to broaden its appeal. "Over the next five years we will put over 35,000 students into the south east region. SETU has a very important role in providing the talent pool for the south east and we will be seizing opportunities in areas that are really important for the south east." Prof Campbell mentioned sustainability, offshore renewables, agriculture, pharmaceutical and various smart specialisations among the technological university's growth areas. "€300m is needed over he next five years to create new campus facilities in Wexford, Waterford and Carlow." She said investment in the SETU roll out will help support investment into the region, making the south east the destination of choice for businesses. "We have students studying in SETU from 29 countries. That can create a new type of student, one with a European mindset." She said SETU are exploring ways to develop more links with Normandy in the area of AI, while also developing partnerships with areas with a strong south east Ireland diaspora like Newfoundland, Ontario and Georgia. Tirlán CEO Jim Bergin said Government need to invest significantly in the grid in Ireland to support renewable energy. "The capacity of the grid is going to be a huge issue. Social change has to happen and that requires significant investment in the electric grid in Ireland because the sources of renewable energy will be diffuse and variable," he said. Mr Bergin spoke of the effect Brexit has hand on the company, (formerly known as Glanbia), with sales into the UK market down 20pc. "We have lower margins and higher costs to service markets in Africa and elsewhere. The Europort is providing an incredible service for us." He said Tirlán is paying famers an extra €18m every year to help transition to a more sustainable model of farming. "It's a far more complex a transition than any transition they went through before because there is a social, psychological impact." He said slide rule policies are needed to reduce the amount of carbon expelled into the environment. "We don't have a bottom up approach. Our concern is that we could reduce our industry far more than what's required. In three or four years time we are going to see the increasing role farmers are playing in renewable energy. They have a huge role to play in carbon also but the policies of government are not there yet. We're urging government to accelerate this." Laura Brien from MARA said Ireland must capitalise on having some of the best wind speeds in Europe. "We have to look at how we best use this maritime resource. We need to bring knowledge, expertise and skills to ensure planning in the maritime area." Ms Brien said MARA are about to start recruiting across a range of specialities, adding that there will be spin-off jobs also created. She said the south east is key to the government meeting its 5GW target for renewable energy by 2030, adding that it will be worth up to €1bn annually to the state. She highlighted a skills gap which she hopes SETU can help fill. "We have been very good at exploiting our land resources. Now we have to look at the sea with university level courses and apprenticeships and training programmes. This is an area where there will be future employment in the south east" Wexford County Council CE Tom Enright spoke of the importance of the university campus in Wexford. He said reports in the past have highlighted the south east economy underperforming , with lower paid jobs in the food and insurance sectors. "Seven years ago a report on the south east region showed that the economy was under performing. Councils in the south east established a regional strategy and today we are seeing progress the region is the 6th fastest growing region in Europe." He spoke of a brain drain which depressed the entire region economically and of the improvements that have been made to the road network and broadband supply over recent years. One area of concern which remains is electricity supply. "We had a study done recently which has shown little or no capacity left in the grid in the south east." Mr Enright said local authorities across the region came together to address legacy issues. "Previously local authorities would have been very insular and it was a case of look after ourselves. In terms of government investment we realised it was futile to be in competition with each other. We decided that a win for say Kilkenny was a win for Wexford or Waterford as it's very commutable." A regional development office was established staffed by local authority employees to find solutions to issues facing all regional counties. "We are starting to see progress being made. It's great to see MARA and SETU - which could bring 2,000 jobs to the region with offshore wind energy." He said the expected boost in financial services jobs for the region has yet to transpire. Mr Enright said the rising populations of counties Wexford, Waterford and Carlow is proof that the government investment in infrastructure is paying dividends. "More people are coming to the region because there are better jobs and better salaries. Across the whole region there is a growing confidence that the future is much brighter." Mr Enright said a lot more than €200m is needed to develop Rosslare Europort. He said the 50 acre site the council has acquired stretching from Whiterock to Killeens in Wexford town needs to be financed. "There has been huge support from government making the region much more vibrant so it can compete with other regions and to be a counterpoint to the huge activity in Dublin. Here there is a greater quality of life and housing is more accessible than other parts of the country. In ten years it will be a different region; one that is much more economically prosperous." Financial director of Nolan Transport, Joan Nolan said the aim for Nolan Transport is to be at the forefront of sustainable logistics. She said we are living through a moment of change, adding that  the company employs over 1,000 people and has 2,000 trailers and over 700 trucks. Attributing its success to its agility, she said: "We move quickly. We adapt. Our policy is change before you have to. We have managed to survive the 80s oil crisis, the 2008 financial crisis, Brexit and Covid." She said planning permission for the second phase of the company's €50m global headquarter plans in Drinagh, Wexford, is being lodged this week, adding that a rail link to the headquarters is being explored with Irish Rail. "Pre-Brexit most of our business went through the UK. Now our business works around it. The world has seen an unprecedented demand for warehousing facilities arising from Brexit and Covid. Earlier this year saw the opening of Johanna I, the €12m investment in Wexford. By seeing Brexit as an opportunity we now offer our customers more supply chain and transport solutions than ever before." She said the company plan to make Johanna I one of the greenest warehouses in Ireland. Head of Ireland's Ancient East Brian O'Flynn said Irish tourism suffered a €6bn loss during the pandemic, which it is still recovering from. He said the opportunities for tourism in the region are growing, adding that international tourists spend more than the Irish. Citing New Ross's High Hill medieval gardens as an example of urban regeneration at its very best in Ireland, Mr O'Brien said tourism can transform a town's fortunes, adding that it encourages private investors to see opportunities and invest. Ms Campbell said ensuring there are quality jobs for young people in the region will mitigate against the loss of people abroad to emigration. Mr Enright said emigration is now a lifestyle choice whereas in the past it was an economic necessity. "Many people wanted to come home before but they wouldn't have had the opportunity. We have been losing top people to other countries." Deputy Governor, Monetary and Financial Stability with the Irish Central Bank, Vasileios Madouros said Rosslare Europort has been at the heart of Ireland's transition trade wise following Brexit, which he described as one manifestation of the broader risk to economies globally of less open trade policies. He said this 'slowbalisation' is a cause for concern, adding that Ireland still lags behind other countries in terms of its infrastructure. Load-Date: September 10, 2023  End of Document
