   Selling Britain: Badenoch pursues es trade deals on seven fronts; TRADE SECRETARY CLOSES IN ON AGREEMENTS AIMED AT REVIVING UK'S FALTERING EXPORT ACTIVITY, Alex Ralph REPORTS The Times (London) August 26, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 46,47 Length: 1275 words Byline: Alex Ralph Body   On a three-day trip to India this week for a meeting of G20 ministers, the business and trade secretary sought to add impetus to an eagerly awaited free trade agreement with Britain. Talks with India have begun for the 12th round of negotiations and Kemi Badenoch said a deal was in the "final stages". "I can't give a deadline. Anything can happen," she told reporters before a meeting with the Indian commerce minister Piyush Goyal in Delhi, adding: "Like any negotiations, the hardest bit tends to come at the end." The talks are among seven the government is conducting, including with Switzerland, Mexico and Israel, as ministers seek to revive the UK's faltering trade performance and encourage British companies to expand internationally to boost a sluggish economy buffeted by the pandemic and Brexit. A deal with India has potentially "major wins for the UK", said Marco Forgione, director-general of the Institute of Export and International Trade, because of "historical trading links with India, the size of the market, the profile of Indian commerce and the fact it is seen to be a protectionist marketplace". However, with sensitivities, particularly around immigration, it remains unlikely a deal will be finalised in time for the prime minister's visit to India for the G20 leaders' summit in September. The benefits of both an India deal and other agreements concluded and under negotiation also remain unclear, while experts are divided on their merits. The first free trade agreements agreed by the UK since it left the EU, with Australia and New Zealand, came into force at the end of May, marking a "new era of international trade". The government has said the deals can increase bilateral trade with both countries by more than 50 per cent, but says it remains premature to assess their economic impact. The benefits, though, have already been questioned. A report from the Commons' crossparty international trade committee last October said the New Zealand deal amounted to 0.02 per cent of the UK's economic growth and risked opening up the UK's beef, dairy and sheep-meat producers to cheaper imports. Free-trade agreement talks with Switzerland were also launched in Berne in May, with second round negotiations due to begin in the autumn. The post-Brexit continuity agreement in 2021 only rolled over terms on trade in goods but not services with Switzerland, leaving what William Bain, head of trade policy at the British Chambers of Commerce, said was a "major gap to fill in one of the most important sets of negotiations for business the government has launched in the post-Brexit era". Switzerland is the UK's sixth largest export destination for services, worth £15 billion a year, and seventh largest export location for goods. Overall, 4.1 per cent of UK exports go there. There is an opportunity for the UK to secure market access for financial, legal, accounting, auditing, architecture and design service companies and to "make permanent the temporary services labour mobility and business travel rules agreed last year", Bain has said. Reflecting the government's latest negotiating position, there is no set timescale, with the UK prioritising "quality of outcomes over speed". There have also been three rounds of negotiations with Mexico to pursue a free trade agreement, the government said in July, and three rounds with Israel for an "upgraded, innovationfocused" agreement, including a visit from Badenoch to Israel in March. The UK has trade agreements with 73 countries plus the EU, worth £1.1 trillion, or 64.4 per cent, of the country's bilateral trade in 2022. Despite the progress, Emma Rowland, trade policy adviser at the Institute of Directors, has cautioned that although free trade agreements are important for the UK's "post-Brexit standing, they are not a panacea". The success of agreements depends on the extent to which businesses use them, experts point out. Forgione said: "The signing of the free trade agreement is to be applauded, but the focus needs to shift, and the secretHE tary of state has made clear that we are going to move from an approach of just signing as many as possible, to making sure that the deals that we sign are good deals and that they will be used." Across the UK just 10 per cent of companies are exporting, according to the British Chambers of Commerce. Businesses of all sizes face a range of stumbling blocks to exporting, from inflationary pressures, a restructuring of global supply chains and a heightened sense of geopolitical risk, which have weakened confidence. The Department for Business and Trade struck a partnership last month with HSBC to help companies seize opportunities from the emerging free trade agreements. A government target, first set under the coalition government in 2012, to achieve £1 trillion of exports per year, is set to be 15 years later than its initial 2020 target. Meanwhile, another target, set when the UK was pursuing a free trade agreement with the US, for 80 per cent of UK trade to be carried out under free trade agreements, has also waned. A prized agreement with the US, the UK's biggest export market after the EU, was championed by Boris Johnson. However, formal talks with Washington on a federal deal are on hold under the Biden administration and Conservative governments have instead focused on non-legally binding statelevel agreements. Instead, President Biden and Rishi Sunak announced in June the Atlantic Declaration, an economic partnership, seen as deepening an alliance to close ranks against China and develop the technology of the future in the West. The UK has also, meanwhile, been pivoting towards allies in the east. Badenoch last month formally signed the treaty confirming the UK's accession to the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) in New Zealand, which Sunak has said demonstrated the "real economic benefits of post- Brexit freedoms". Membership is estimated to add £1.8 billion a year to the UK economy by the end of the decade, and to increase if other countries join. Critics, though, says the economic benefits are limited. Dennis Novy, professor in the department of economics at the University of Warwick, said pursuing trade agreements was "a step in the right direction", but added: "What needs to be said very clearly as the big elephant in the room, is that the UK is suffering a lot by losing membership of the European Union. "It's a very brutal world where size really matters and the big guys, the US, China and the EU, can get largely what they want from trade agreements". The post-Brexit Trade and Co-operation Agreement with the EU, signed in January 2021, is billed by the government as "the world's biggest zero-tariff, zero-quota trade deal", providing a "strong base" for UK businesses to trade with the EU. However, businesses continue to struggle to trade with the bloc. A review of the agreement is to take place in 2026 and the Windsor Framework this year to improve trading conditions between Britain and Northern Ireland has increased optimism that London and Brussels can compromise. Some experts think the time has come for a shift in the UK's trade strategy. The Resolution Foundation, in its Trading Up report, said the UK's initial post-Brexit trade strategy had "run out of road and must be replaced with a far more ambitious twin-track trade strategy that protects high-value manufacturing while seeking out new markets for our world-leading services sector". Britain's post-Brexit trade approach has focused on a high volume of free trade agreements, but this was unsuited to building on the country's strengths as a service "superpower". Graphic    Kemi Badenoch has been involved in a number of talks on free trade agreements with counterparts around the world, saying "the hardest part comes at the end" Load-Date: August 26, 2023  End of Document
