   SIR KEIR Starmer wants to secure [...]; ANALYSIS The Express September 19, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 300 words Byline: ANAND MENON Body   SIR KEIR Starmer wants to secure a "much better" Brexit deal for the UK. But it's far from clear he can deliver on this pledge. For one thing, the kinds of "improvements" he has in mind - signing an agreement on veterinary standards, for instance - will not make much of a dent in the impact Brexit has had on the UK economy. And its far from a given that the EU will be willing to play ball even on limited initiatives such as this. It's hard for us in the UK to appreciate just how little time they spend in Brussels worrying about us. The Europeans are generally quite happy with the Trade and Cooperation Agreement that Boris Johnson negotiated. As we outline in our report, it gives them pretty frictionless trade in goods (where they have a trade surplus with us) while providing relatively little for trade in services (where we have a surplus with them). The EU might be reluctant to spend time negotiating with a Starmer Government if a succeeding Conservative administration looks likely to ditch whatever they agree on. All this being said, the Labour initiative speaks not only to the growing confidence of the party, allowing it to step on to terrain once owned by the Tories. It also reflects a belief that the public don't think Brexit is working and the Tories are responsible. Brexit can be added to the long list of issues - public services, the economy, immigration - on which Labour say the Conservatives are failing. None of which means that Starmer is about to suggest significantly closer links with the EU. For all the hysterical reaction to his proposals, they are extremely limited. Labour are clear that the one thing that really would limit the economic impact of Brexit - UK participation in the single market - is off the table. The current row is much ado about not very much at all. Load-Date: September 19, 2023  End of Document
