   Sloping off Brexit proves a barrier to EU tourism jobs Financial Times (London, England) June 15, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 435 words Body   The number of British citizens working in the EU travel industry in frontline roles such as travel reps, ski guides or chalet hosts has fallen more than twothirds since Brexit, research shows. The cost of obtaining visas, work permits and other paperwork after Brexit was blamed for a sharp reduction in opportunities that particularly hit young Britons hoping to work as "seasonaires" in Europe, the survey of 100 industry bosses found. Mark Tanzer, chief executive of travel association Abta, which coauthored the research, urged the government to work with the EU to improve visa and youth mobility arrangements, which were restricted after the UK left the EU in 2021. "With the UK outbound travel industry contributing £49bn a year to the UK economy, and a major driver of growth, not putting in the right mobility arrangements with the EU could come at a cost to UK plc," he said. Under the EU-UK trade deal, Britons can travel to the EU for 90 days in any 180-day period, but need permits and visas for seasonal travel jobs. Before Brexit, these roles were open to Britons who could work in the EU on contracts issued by UK-based companies. Charles Owen, managing director of Seasonal Businesses in Travel (SBiT), which co-commissioned the report, said the findings bore out the industry's worst predictions about Brexit. The sector wants ministers to agree a youth mobility scheme with the EU, like the one with countries such as Australia, Canada and New Zealand, that allows 18- to 30-year-olds to live and work in the UK for up to two years. "It is in both the UK and EU's interest to provide a policy framework that enables travel and tourism between the UK and EU to thrive - given the (EURO)40bn contribution UK tourism makes to the EU each year," Owen added. The survey found the number of UK travel workers in the EU declined by nearly two-thirds, from 11,970 in 2017 - the last full year not impacted by the 2016 Brexit vote - to 3,700 in 2023, with 18- to 24-yearolds showing the sharpest fall. With the cost of obtaining permits for a UK worker in France averaging £880, the number of catered holidays being offered in France by UK companies more than halved since 2017. The number employed in the French Alps over winter fell more than 70 per cent. In some countries, such as Austria, it was impossible to employ UK workers because of the visa quota system, said Sarah Searson, managing director of Skiworld, a UK ski tour operator. Having to rely on an uncertain supply of EU passport holders meant the company had had to "relinquish over two-thirds of our exclusive chalet beds", she said. Peter Foster Graphic    French alps: Britons seeking work in the EU travel industry, such as in skiing, need permits and visas Hemis/Alamy Load-Date: June 14, 2023  End of Document
