   Sod turned on €170 million, 29 building development of customs facilities at Rosslare Europort Wexford People (Ireland) October 13, 2023  Copyright 2023 INM plc All Rights Reserved  Length: 1173 words Body   Suits, boots and hard-hats were the order of the day on Thursday in Rosslare Europort as Minister of State at the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform Patrick O'Donovan arrived to turn the sod on a €170 million project which is set to utterly transform Rosslare Europort. The hum of heavy machinery was evident all over the port as major groundworks get underway for the Terminal 7 project, which will provide permanent Brexit infrastructure at Rosslare Europort in compliance with EU customs legislation. Following photographs outside, representatives from the OPW, contractors, engineers, consultants and representatives from Revenue and Customs and An Garda Síochána were invited inside the terminal building, where they were able to pore over a scale model of what the port will look like in 18 to 24 months when the T7 project is complete. The development consists of some 29 separate buildings, the biggest of which will be a customs animal inspection area. It also includes new facilities for Garda Síochána immigration officers, Revenue and Customs, agriculture and marine, the HSE, a new home for the revenue fixed scanner, freight check and examination areas and a host of new administration areas and facilities for staff. Grabbing a coffee having performed the ceremonial turning of the sod, Minister O'Donovan said described the work under way in Rosslare as being among the biggest projects in the country. "Off  the top of my head I can't think of any other civil contract to the value of €170 million that's taking place anywhere in the country outside of Dublin," he said.  "There's nothing of this magnitude happening anywhere else in the country. This is a massive investment in Co Wexford. It will transform Rosslare Europort and it's a serious vote of confidence from the government and the EU." Simply put, there's a huge amount of work for contractors JP Construction and a whole host of sub-contractors to do, but the Minister is hopeful that everything will be delivered on time and on budget.  "18 to 24 months is the most likely timeframe," he said. "We want to get it done as soon as possible, but you can see the scale of this is enormous. It's just short of 30 acres of actual construction site and there's a huge crew (up to 300 people) working down there. "One of the good things from a Wexford point of view is there's a lot of local contractors have been able to get in on the job we're doing here." In his speech, Minister O'Donovan drew a few chuckles from the room as he offered thank-yous.  "The first people we can thank is the British public," he smiled. "Were it not for Brexit, we wouldn't have had the temporary facilities we have up the road and we certainly wouldn't be looking at such an enormous investment here in Rosslare Europort. "Regardless of the UK's position in the future and the Windsor Protocol and all that type of thing, this investment in its scale is so massive that it will transform this port forever." Minister O'Donovan pointed towards a potential shift in the market away from Dublin Port, noting that Rosslare Europort is ideally positioned to capitalise. "The government is very much committed to this port and its advancement as a major hub of connectivity not just to the UK, but to the rest of Europe," he said. "I know there are constraints in Dublin. They are very obvious and best of luck to them, but there are other ports around the country that can take up the slack." While critics have suggested that the development of Rosslare Europort is moving too slow and that the government was not proactive enough in anticipating the demand that would arise from Brexit, their point of view doesn't hold much stock with the Minister. "Some people on a fine day will always tell you that there's rain in the forecast," he said. "This is an enormous investment by the government into Rosslare. Is it reactive? Well if the UK didn't leave the European Union, we probably wouldn't be having this conversation. If my aunt's name was John, she'd be my uncle. "I don't deal in whataboutery and I'm certainly not interested in people that have nothing good to say about investments of this nature and who look for negative commentary so that they can get a line in your paper or a quote on South East Radio. They have nothing to offer. I'm focused on infrastructural development and a positive outcome with the Office of Public Works and our colleagues. "Public representatives who just want to run down significant investments like this need to take a long hard look at themselves." The bulk of the €170 million project being launched by the Minister focuses on installing state of the art customs facilities within the curtilage of Rosslare Europort. It leaves one obvious question - what will happen to the current "temporary" customs site in Kilrane, which has cost millions since it was hastily put in place in the immediate aftermath of Brexit? "It's a fabulous facility," Minister O'Donovan said. "I've been in and out of it a number of times before we ever had agreement about this site. It won't go to waste. There's a lot of government departments that need space. There's a lot of government agencies and public bodies that need space. Once it's vacated, with the government, we will examine the best possible options. We'll commence the process as soon as possible, so that when it is vacated, somebody will be in a position to move into it." In terms of Rosslare Europort, Chief Executive of Iarnród Éireann (port authority for Rosslare Europort) Jim Meade said that the Terminal 7 project is just the very beginning. "Rosslare Europort has grown exponentially in recent times, but we're not even half way there yet," he said. "We have huge plans to develop the port as the Offshore Renewable Energy Hub for the country and I think there'll be more shipping routes to come, because they want to come." For his part, Director General of Customs Gerry Harrahill is excited to see state of the art facilities installed in Rosslare. He noted that, pre-Brexit, Rosslare saw an annual figure of around €7 million for drug seizures. In the first nine months of 2023, the figure was already at €24 million. "These new facilities are really important in terms of facilitating legitimate trade passing through and disrupting illegitimate trade. I look forward to coming back here in 18 to 24 month's time to attend the official opening of these state of the art facilities." Cathaoirleach of the Rosslare Municipal District Cllr Jim Moore couldn't help but smile as he took in the scale model of what the new Europort layout would look like. He was the only person in attendance who was involved in the last substantial capital development some 30 years ago for the dredging and reclamation of land, some 55 acres on which the current €170m project will now be built. "Back in the day, I was a contractor on the site and I think at the time the cost was around £14 million," he smiles. "The project also provided new linkspans, fisherman's wall and the 'safe'. We've come a long way since then." Load-Date: October 13, 2023  End of Document
