   Starmer: It is right to want closer EU ties The Express September 23, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 5 Length: 449 words Byline: Christian Calgie Body   SIR Keir Starmer insists he is right to want closer ties with the European Union if he wins power. The Labour leader has been criticised by Brexiteers after he was caught saying he did not want to diverge from rules made in Brussels. Senior Tories claimed the mask has slipped and shown the Remainer's intentions, even though he has ruled out rejoining the bloc. But Sir Keir defended the comments as he insisted he has always said "there's no case for going back into the EU, and that includes the Single Market and the Customs Union". Environment Minister Mark Spencer hit out at Sir Keir's position, telling GB News: "We don't really know what he's saying, he's flip-flopping about. Democracy "One minute he wants to have free movement, the next he is saying he wants to control our borders. "He doesn't seem to have a clear policy and he seems to make it up on the hoof on occasion. It's difficult to define what he stands for. "He seems to be, to me, obsessed with getting into power but doesn't really have a principle to get in there - I think that's the real danger of Labour." He added it is important to acknowledge "democracy happened". "The country voted to leave the EU," he explained. "The Prime Minister is delivering that Brexit and now we are an independent country, separate from the EU, but we can still trade with them and co-operate with them, but on our own terms. "I think that's the right relationship. I think to keep obsessing over Brexit and looking back with pinktinted spectacles just takes us back in time." He insisted: "We've got to get over the fact that we voted to leave the EU, we need to embrace that, make the most of it and stop looking backwards as the Labour Party appear to want to do." Sir Keir said: "We will not be a rule-taker.The rules and laws of this country will be made in Parliament according to the national interest. "But that does not mean that a Labour Government wants to lower standards on food, wants to lower standards on people's rights at work.The Labour Party's been completely consistent on those issues for many, many years - there's no surprise here. "Incidentally this is also Government policy." Asked if he would confirm whether he would or would not be looking to diverge from EU rules, the Labour leader repeated himself. Conservative MP Mark Jenkinson said: "Divergence is the reason for Brexit... And Sir Keir wants to hand it all back over to the EU". Fellow Tory Aaron Bell said Sir Keir's desire to reopen the Brexit wounds of the past would mean "more division and paralysis". Shadow Foreign Secretary David Lammy yesterday demanded a "fundamental" overhaul of the current Brexit deal, claiming Labour will "reconnect" Britain with Brussels. Graphic    Sir Keir...with Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves yesterday Load-Date: September 23, 2023  End of Document
