   Starmer should pursue closer EU ties, says Blair i-news July 17, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 9 Length: 319 words Byline: Poppy Wood Body   Fixing Britain's relations with the European Union should be one of the top priorities for a Labour government, Sir Tony Blair has said. The former Labour prime minister said Sir Keir Starmer should make efforts to heal post-Brexit relations with the EU as soon as possible if he is elected to No 10. Speaking to Sky News's Sophy Ridge, Sir Tony said the four immediate priorities for a Labour administration should include planning reforms, changing investment rules, dealing with the labour shortage and ""ix[ing] the Brexit relationship". He added that a Labour government should pursue a closer relationship with the EU, despite Sir Keir already ruling out rejoining the single market and customs union. Sir Tony said it would be "very difficult" to rejoin the EU immediately because "we've spent seven years diverted in government from dealing with a lot of the big issues because we've had to deal with Brexit". However, he suggested that lasting Labour power could see "a future generation" reverse Brexit and help Britain rejoin the EU. "I mean, I would love it if it had never happened, obviously. But I think if you were to go back into a negotiation - actually go fully back into the EU at this moment in time - it would be a huge diversion for the Government… A future generation? That's another matter." Sir Tony said the UK is currently "too weak" to reverse Brexit and that the country should only start thinking seriously about rejoining the EU "when it's strong", with Britain set to remain world's worst-performing large economy in 2023, according to the International Monetary Fund. He suggested Britain should focus its energies in the meantime on smoothing over tensions that have arisen as a result of Brexit, including "aligning with the regulatory framework in Europe" and "co-operating in other big areas in energy", including rejoining the Horizon programme, Europe's £85bn science research scheme. Load-Date: July 17, 2023  End of Document
