   Starmer set to reject EU masterplan that could strengthen ties with UK i-news September 20, 2023 SC1 Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 708 words Byline: Arj Singh Body   Sir Keir Starmer is set to reject EU overtures to join a new "multispeed" Europe that could include associate membership for the UK. A senior Labour source told i the idea was a "non-starter" after France and Germany tabled a plan for a new multilayer model of EU membership that includes a plan to strengthen the bloc's post-Brexit relationship with the UK. An EU source suggested the plan, while in the works for some time, is likely to have been partly designed with an idea of how the UK could fit in, amid reports France and Germany see an opportunity for closer ties under a Labour government. "There is, of course, interest to strengthen ties with the UK in this new cycle and ensure unity amongst Western partners," the EU source said. i understands there is also a belief in the EU that Labour could become warmer to the plan when in power. But despite Sir Keir's call early this week for closer trading relations with the EU in the forthcoming review of Boris Johnson's Trade and Co-operation Agreement (TCA) deal, a Labour spokesman said: "Labour will seek a better deal for Britain. This does not involve any form of membership." The plan emerged as Sir Keir met French President Emmanuel Macron for talks in Paris focused on strengthening "prosperity and security" and cross-Channel ties, although neither side said the pair discussed Brexit. A senior Labour source said the Franco-German plan was a "nonstarter" amid reports that associate membership could include single market obligations such as signing up to the free movement of people and the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice (ECJ). But there were already signs of the Tories seizing on any suggestion of Labour seeking closer ties with the EU as an indication he wanted to unpick Brexit. It comes as the Brexit debate continues to bubble up within Labour. Yesterday, senior MP Stella Creasy said that 20 local parties - including those of three Shadow Cabinet ministers - will call on Sir Keir, at conference next month, to make rebuilding relations with the EU a "priority" in his first term in office. Ms Creasy, the chair of Labour Movement for Europe, told i the "inner circle" plan was not featuring in the group's thinking, but stressed it was important to look ahead to smooth over the future trade relationship with the EU to ease Brexit's impact on the economy. In Paris, Sir Keir sought to break the ice with an exchange of gifts; he gave Mr Macron a personalised Arsenal shirt and received a pair of cufflinks in return. Speaking to reporters after the meeting, the Labour leader said the "constructive and positive" talks covered a "wide range of topics" relating to global politics. He refused to be drawn on whether he believed Mr Macron was hoping for the election of a Labour government, but said it was important they got to know one another and that he was "very pleased with the outcome". In a statement, the French government said the pair "discussed the need to guarantee economic and energy security in Europe and reaffirmed their desire to provide Ukraine and its people with ongoing support". The statement added: "Finally, they talked about the importance of strengthening co-operation between France and the UK so that the partnership continues to ensure the French and British people's prosperity and security." New EU France and Germany make case for reform The Franco-German plan, which has been described as one of "concentric circles" as well as "Macron's onion", was published in a so-called "non-paper". The two countries are keen for a new model for the EU to cope with a bigger and still enlarging bloc, including four so-called circles of membership: 1 A so-called "inner circle" would include countries like France and Germany willing to sign up to radical integration like removing national votes on defence, foreign policy and security. 2 A second tier of nations that do not wish to co-operate at such a deep level. 3 An "associate outer tier" including countries in the single market like Norway, Switzerland or potentially the UK that would not be bound to the EU principle of "ever closer union". 4 The existing European Political Community (EPC), of which the United Kingdom is a member, focused on diplomatic and political co-operation. Arj Singh Load-Date: September 20, 2023  End of Document
