   Starmer can mend ties with Ireland, but economic revival is a tougher prospect Irish Independent October 19, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS WEEK;NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 1075 words Byline: DAVIDCHANCE Body   Thirteen years of Conservative rule in Britain has not been kind to Ireland - the wrecking ball of Brexit has seen to that - so you can understand why last week's Labour conference in Liverpool offered a glimmer of hope that our nearest neighbour might return to some kind of normality in the near future. Anglo-Irish relations were at a high a decade ago under Enda Kenny and David Cameron, but the latter uncorked the Brexit genie when, to secure a Tory election win, he promised a referendum on Britain's membership in the EU. Cameron quit and others were left to pick up the pieces, which led to the cynical gamesmanship of Boris Johnson and the breath-taking incompetence of Liz Truss. The latest inheritor of the poisoned Tory chalice, Rishi Sunak, is just floundering and is sounding more populist and less 'managerial' as time goes on. Conservative politicians seemed to go out of their way to make incendiary comments as they lurched towards leaving the EU. At one stage then Priti Patel, who went on to become home minister, insinuated that a food blockade would force Ireland into submission in the Brexit talks. She wasn't the only one whose words poisoned relations between London and Dublin. By contrast Keir Starmer sounded measured and sane in Liverpool, the most Irish of England's cities. His shadow cabinet is a mix of experience - Hilary Benn at Northern Ireland was in the Blair government (there have been eight occupants of Hillsborough Castle since 2010) - and seriousness - Rachel Reeves is an experienced economist who is in line to become Britain's first female finance minister. So yes, Labour victory in a UK election that is likely to happen next year would bring a welcome change in tone in relations. There will likely be a series of fixes of the kind we have seen under Sunak to rectify some of the gaps caused by Brexit - although it will not be reversed by Starmer. Beyond that it's the economy. And that also matters a great deal to Ireland even though the dialogue here is dominated by US multinationals and the size of the European market. While it is true that Britain's importance as an export market for Irish goods has halved since the year 2000, when it took one in five of all goods exports by value, the UK is still the largest single trade destination after the US and Germany. It buys a third of agriculture's overseas sales, almost the same as the European Union combined. Countries naturally trade more with those closest than the those far away - something the land of Brexit forgot - and a more prosperous Britain would be good for Irish exporters. Sadly, Britons have been getting steadily poorer on a relative basis since the financial crisis even as Ireland has grown richer. The Resolution Foundation, a social policy thinktank, says that if UK wages had continued to grow as they were before the financial crash of 2008, real average weekly earnings would be around £11,000 per year higher than they currently are. Fixing that is going to be hard work. Reeves pledged in her barnstorming speech in Liverpool to restore credibility "after Tory misrule" and to usher in "a new era of economic security". What this newer 'New Labour' actually wants, as Sam Freedman a senior fellow at the Institute for Government thinktank notes, is to become Denmark - a high-growth, social democratic country with better worker rights, more state direction, and less inequality. That's a huge ask and something that will take a long time to achieve. The sage advice to someone asking directions that 'I wouldn't start from here' applies in spades to the UK. Britain's finances are in a parlous condition with government debt standing at 100pc of gross domestic product, more than twice the 40pc the original New Labour under Tony Blair inherited in 1997. Those dire standard of living indicators from the Resolution Foundation reflect an economy where growth has halved since the crash and productivity growth - the super economic sauce that pays for better government and wage rises - is half that of the richest 25 countries in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Inflation in the UK is higher than in any other large rich nation and is running at twice the rate of the US. Starmer and Reeves have laced their speeches with references to game-changing reforms but at the same time have promised "ironclad fiscal rules" and just like Blair and Gordon Brown, they have said they will stick to Tory spending rules so as not to be seen as the party of spendthrifts. There's the rub, it took the last Labour government two wasted years to summon up the courage to spend. In a recent article in the Financial Times, Reeves said any Labour government would balance the current budget by reducing government debt as a share of GDP and that's actually a more restrictive stance than that of the current Sunak administration. Quite how it squares the tiny crowd-pleasing tax measures on rich foreigners and public schools with spending plans such as its £28bn green programme, a goal to get 1.5 million houses built and "the biggest expansion of NHS staff in history" is not clear. The Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates that to increase staffing by 60pc, spending on the NHS in England will have to rise by 2pc of GDP by 2036-2037. "In 1997, the incoming Labour government inherited an economy that was growing strongly and public finances that were in good shape. The contrast with what a Labour administration is likely to inherit next year could scarcely be greater. The realities of dealing with this inheritance will be problematic for any government after the next election," writes Andrew Goodwin, chief UK economist at Oxford Economics. Starmer has indeed saved the Labour party and has turned it round in record time after the huge defeat under Jeremy Corbyn. For voters, it is now a viable electoral choice and has a commanding lead in opinion polls. The credit belongs to him. A British prime minister who isn't in hock to the worst of the Tory right will be welcomed, but then the hard work begins. The problems facing Britain, as we have seen, are deep-seated and you aren't going to fix them with sloganeering or by fiddling around at the edges. It's going to require a far bolder agenda that will involve deep, unpopular and hard supply-side reforms which take a long time to bear fruit. 'Inflation in the UK is higher than in any other large rich nation and is running at twice the rate of the US' Graphic    Keir Starmer has made Labour a viable electoral choice in the UK. Photo: Anthony Devlin/Bloomberg Load-Date: October 19, 2023  End of Document
