   The braggarts who knew Latin and made the business of their lives in the major college. CE Noticias Financieras English November 23, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 4417 words Body    When old Winston Churchill reflected on British rhetoric, you had to listen to him. During a visit to a university debating club, the Oxford Union, Churchill told student Quintin Hogg (later a Tory minister), "In this country, if you can talk, you can do anything."  Blood, sweat, tears... and gold pips.  "The most astute observers of British public life will have noticed a particular breed of establishment men and women. They are over forty and smugly successful and successfully smug, and most likely Oxford-educated." It was published, in 1989, by the Cherwell, Oxford's satirical newspaper, when there were still 30 years to go before the university's star pupil of those years, Boris Johnson, became prime minister and took the UK out of Europe.  Writing in the Cherwell was Simon Kuper, a journalist for the Financial Times, who now publishes Amigocracy, about "how a small caste of Oxford Tories took over the UK." "The Cherwell was a vague paper, also poorly written, in keeping with the characteristic Oxford style, with its incessant irony and jokes incomprehensible to anyone outside the university. Viewed in perspective, however, it turns out that we weren't just satirizing inconsequential teenage blowhards. Even if we didn't realize it, we were witnessing the construction of power in England," writes Kuper.  Before we get into the nitty-gritty, and as a taste of the festival that is Amigocracy, here's a button:  "In the 1980s, the dominant personality among the faculty of the Oxford History Faculty was that of Norman Stone. His reputation as an unabashed bully did not prevent him from being appointed professor in 1985. Stone was a most entertaining professor: even at nine o'clock in the morning, clutching his lectern with both hands to avoid falling over drunk, he could improvise an entire lecture on European history with a Glaswegian accent, without notes and without stopping for an hour at a time. Oxford seemed short-sighted, overly bureaucratic, liberal and even Marxist: 'I've always hated that place (...). To quote St. Matthew's Gospel: 'The world would have been a better place if these people had not existed. I have never been in a more absurd place'. In the words of one of his former university classmates, his intellectual approach to education was as follows: ' When you see a consensus, run toward it at full speed and headbutt it out of the way.' Stone was one of Thatcher's few apostles at the university and sometimes acted as her advisor. Given his natural instinct for breaking with the established order, he loathed the wets - the moderate Tories - and wimpy Tories like John Major. He said of his students that they were 'smelly and distracted', but he was not difficult to fraternize with; especially at the bar. In fact, I met him drunk at a student party. As a good Thatcherite troublemaker, Eurosceptic and politically incorrect, he exerted a fatal attraction for young Tories attached to the past."  The oldest 'oxocracy' in the world  Kuper argues that the UK is an oxocracy: since 1940, 13 of the 17 prime ministers studied there. The last five, all Tories, came out of Oxford. The leader of the opposition and front-runner in the next election, Keir Starmer, did too.  Many of them went before that to Eton, a private school for gentlemen. The road that leads from Eton to Parliament, passing through Oxford, is not to be missed: youngsters "educated to take power since they were kids", make a network of contacts fatter than the Yellow Pages and end up governing the destinies of a country. The goal, therefore, would not only be to make money, but to break the codfish. Elites in their own sauce.  "Both detractors and defenders of Oxford always resort to the same word: elitist. However, each uses it with a different meaning. For the detractors, it refers to the hereditary elite; for the defenders, to the meritocratic elite. And, to tell the truth, almost everyone who gets into Oxford is a mixture of privilege and merit in varying proportions," Kuper reasons.  Proponents of meritocracy say it is the rule of the best, but at Oxford it was also the sainete of the best. Graham Greene, the national jewel of British letters, spent more time passed out than upright at Oxford: "For almost a term I would go to bed drunk and start drinking as soon as I got up... I only had to sober up once a week to read a paper to my tutor."  Working hard at Oxford was seen as worse than being "brilliant without trying hard". A state of affairs described by Jan Morris as "spontaneous superiority". The "idle genius" was Oxford's favorite mascot, able to cajole professors with his flowery verbiage and spend the rest of his time networking and having a grand old time. "Boris Johnson's page in the 1983 yearbook, his senior year, features a photograph of himself with two scarves and a machine gun above an inscription promising to score 'more shots in his phallocratic phallus,'" Kuper recalls.  In 1991, American Rosa Ehrenreich came to Oxford after a stint at Harvard. "That university was so anti-intellectual, so macho and so alcoholic that the best and most interesting students either secluded themselves in their rooms or were forced to adopt some self-defense mechanism, such as censoring what they thought about the university or pretending to be as redneck as their classmates," she recounts in the essay.  Wasn't all this counterproductive for a university that boasted of molding elites? It could be, but, Oxford had "little incentive to raise academic standards because it enjoyed a near monopoly of the best-qualified British students," according to Ehrenreich.  Sums up Kuper: "At Oxford you could strive if you wanted to. But during the 1980s and 1990s trying hard was not compulsory."  At some point in the twentieth century, however, the posh, no-brainers lost their charm. Even in the U.K. the class system needed a bit of decorum. "Society began to demand that the ruling class be composed of meritocratic nerds, and Eton began to produce meritocratic nerds," the book explains. Anthony Sampson said it is Anatomy of Britain: the Etonians of the past were seen as "self-confident, stupid and out of touch with reality students" and those of the 1980s as "self-confident, intelligent and still out of touch with reality students." But while meritocracy forced form control, an eighties political hurricane again unhinged Oxford's upper classes: Thatcherism. "The privileges were the same as always, but with the arrival of Thatcher to power many managed to convince themselves that they were where they were thanks to merit and only thanks to merit," according to the text.  In 1979, "wage inequalities in England reached historic lows, but then Thatcher came along and restored all the inequalities". The Thatcherite rave, therefore, was greeted with jubilation by the Oxford Tories, "who were regaining the confidence that the years of social democracy had robbed them of... Privilege and the upper-class accent once again became praiseworthy attributes." So did extravagant changes in dress, as photographer Dafydd Jones recounts, "Students no longer dressed like long-haired tramps. Suddenly, black tie and ball gowns became the de rigueur attire. At first, I thought it was a stylistic reaction to the casual style of the sixties and seventies. Now I understand that it was a direct result of Thatcher's election: the rich were once again benefiting from tax cuts and confidence was beginning to return".  Poor child landowner  But if Thatcher's arrival empowered Oxford's Tory elites, the Return to Brideshead series (1981) gave them aesthetic encouragement. Or the highly influential adaptation of an Evelyn Waugh novel about the bucolic misadventures of a young aristocrat between Oxford and the family manor. "The series gave an aura of camp glamour to the Oxford gentry."  Why did such a seemingly out-of-period series stick so well?  1) "The Oxford of the 1920s that Waugh imagined existed only in his imagination, but it was still strangely familiar to the more affluent students of the 1980s. The six decades that separated them brought crises, wars, and social democracy. In the 1980s, and for the first time since the original Brideshead generation, affluent Britons could finally enjoy Oxford without having to worry about boring leftist ideologies or the state of the world... Dressed in tuxedos and proud to offend unemployed country bumpkins. Brideshead inspired the emergence of a new youth culture comparable to punk, indie music or soccer hooliganism, except that it was a culture specific to the posh and their cheap imitators."  2) "Future right-wing journalist James Delingpole, a relatively ordinary middle-class Birmingham boy who at Oxford dressed like a Tory landowner, often recalls with a laugh: 'I wanted to be adopted by the aristocracy.' Owen Matthews, now writing about Russia, says: 'The appeal was mainly aesthetic. Whether consciously or unconsciously, we were copying Waugh's odd combination of adoration and irony. I thought it was wonderful to smoke oval cigarettes and hang out with girls in flowing dresses. We spent a lot of time dressed up and throwing each other into the lake. I thought that was the Oxford spirit. Lined in tweed and decked out in openwork leather shoes, we ate strawberries in punts and played at being members of a world long gone," the essay sums up.  It was the time for high-flying escapism, as Rupert Soames, an Oxford student and Churchill's grandson, told the press at the time: "Students spent the sixties thinking that the world was badly organized and that they could do something about it. It turned out not to be true. Now we take ourselves less seriously, which I find rather more attractive."  If the aesthetic parallels were clear, there was a small big difference between Lord Sebastian Flyte, the unambitious protagonist of Waugh's novel, and the 1980s Oxford Tories, who "wanted to succeed and become rich and famous in Thatcher's England. They had landed at Oxford already equipped with the accent of the ruling class, the rhetorical skills and the gift of handling themselves confidently among the ruling class: qualities that the rest of us students learned when we got to university. Students at colleges like Eton or Winchester came from families who expected nothing less than absolute success and who put no ceiling on their offspring's ambitions."  Cockfighting  "Having grown up outside England, I was fascinated by the blabbering of my British peers who had been trained from childhood to speak fluently," the book's author recounts.  Indeed, what gracefully greased the mechanism of social climbing, what made it uniquely and irresistibly British, was the training of jet puppies for rhetorical filigree. Sexy talk reached limits as exalted as they were parodic in 1980s Oxford.  If having good grades was important to get into university, no less important was the pre-interview, where you displayed your persuasive charms before a sherry-drunk professor from good morning .....  "In the eighties, alcohol, served free and in abundance in the staff canteen, was just another institution for the faculty... Many of the tutors didn't care if the students had prepared their presentations or if they were just talking for the sake of talking... In my time, a student could leave Oxford transformed and improved by the best faculty-student ratio in the world, or he could finish his degree without having learned anything except how to make a convincing fool of himself".  "Professors, sprawled out on their canapés, would throw out question after question on whatever subject was keeping them awake at night. I know of one student who was asked, 'Don't you think St. Mark's Square in Venice looks like a branch of Barclay's Bank?' The entrance interview is designed in order to test the student's ability to speak on any subject without being knowledgeable, i.e., talking for the sake of talking. Many professors of the time were looking for, as they put it, 'Renaissance men' (or even women) who would be entertaining to teach. They had total freedom to apply their personal criteria; for example, there was one professor who shamelessly favored blond, tall, private-school students. If you had good grades and were good at speaking and writing, you were given a ticket into England's ruling class," according to Kuper. "At Oxford they teach you to speak and write well and with self-confidence about matters you don't know."  And about the essays the students had to write: "You didn't have to construct your own argument...it was enough to construct a bold, contradictory argument that argued that everything said so far on the subject in question was wrong."  The apotheosis came in the final exams, with the students dressed up in evening dress(bow ties for them, black mini-skirts for them; almost all of them, "full of sedatives") and with the chatter more testosteronic than ever: "Provocative essays were a man's thing. Good writers who pulled entire papers out of their sleeves and were able to defend arguments they didn't believe in tended to get better grades than serious academics who had read every text in the course and were interested in the complexity of the nuances," Kuper says.  Kalypso Nicolaïdis, a retired professor of International Relations at Oxford, attests in the book: "If a student is able to produce two well-written and well-argued papers a week, he or she can get away with not knowing much about the subject in question. It may sound superficial, but knowing how to communicate is very useful. You have to know how to win people over, especially if you want to be in politics. Oxford knows this and rewards it.  It is true that improvising arguments in front of a drunken professor has undoubted merit, but it is also true that some of them had previously trained in the mother of all debating societies, the Oxford Union, founded in 1823, a mixture of gentlemen's club and youth parliament. The great debating chamber of Europe. The terrible children of the future British parliamentarism. The laboratory where one tested rhetoric, electoral machinery and political razzmatazz... all the time: elections to elect the president of the Oxford Union were held every two months; Boris became president.  "The institution was in keeping with Oxford classes and the social language of the university: ironic blather. It was honing the skills of expression that made it possible for aspiring politicians, lawyers and columnists to argue any case, whether they believed in it or not...A small elite monopolized the stage." A lower-middle-class student who "was scared to even ask questions during the debates" recalls, "The truth is that the debates were glorious and fun. The people were entertaining and funny. From the audience we booed or cheered. It was a circus. It never occurred to me that these people could become prime ministers.  In the rhetorical talent for speeches there was not only a cut of class - Eton had previously prepared its students for these cockfights - but also of gender. According to Rachel Johnson, Boris's sister, "posh girls' schools" did not encourage as much verbosity as Eton: "Not even St Paul's, the best girls' school in the country, could offer a comparable experience. As women, we were not encouraged to show off like men or to dazzle or to amuse: all important skills. Because they are all part of an annihilating virtue that Theresa May [the uncharismatic prime minister who preceded Boris] never had, namely charm. If you know how to use your charm, you're already winning."  There was also a rift between Tory and Labour banners. Clash of rhetorical styles, sparkling versus analytical, superficial versus dull. A former student who would later hold public office claims that while "the current Tory political style is characterized by the oratorical tricks they 'got out of the Oxford Union," the rhetoric of the Oxford Labour Club, where Keir Starmer was, consisted of "tortuous debates on post-Marxism.""While Johnson polished his jokes about the Union's presidential throne, Labour Club meetings were about proposing or seconding bureaucratic or international motions." "The love of rules and procedures crushed any possibility of having a more spontaneous and improvised debate; even if a good many Labourites had not learned to improvise in theschool. The consequences are still apparent today: Starmer is an analytical but bland, boring speaker with an overly nasal tone of voice," according to Kuper.  Former Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull studied at Oxford in the late 1970s. His memories are acidic:  "Oxford was the first place where someone asked me, 'What does your father do for a living?' They were obsessed with how they spoke, what their social background was, where they had gone to school and so on. It's not that these distinctions don't exist in Australia, but they're on the margins of the margins of the country, compared to the UK."  "The Oxford Union was student politics of the pile: the most important thing was to get to the top of the muck. Student politics is about gaming... Many of those who move from student politics to real politics are more dazzled by the dynamics of gaming than they are by what the goal of politics should be, i.e. making good public policy. The Union is not so much a forum in which to debate relevant issues and topics of the day, but rather a place in which to learn how to become an entertaining speaker."  Dead languages  The academic spin-off also had its day: the humanities went to mass at Oxford. Now that the humanities belong to the poor, it is amusing to remember that the undervalued at Oxford were those who did not study the humanities. Says Kuper: "England has eminent scientists, engineers and computer scientists, but they are stuck in the engine room while the orators drive the train. Today, Oxford specializes in educating the politicians and civil servants who run the British state, the lawyers and accountants who maintain the economy , and the commentators who narrate the show. These people, myself included, typically drop out of science and math at school, aged sixteen, and learn only basic notions of economics. In 2016, in Parliament, there were seven times more MPs who had studied politics at university than engineering."  The Oxford elites, in short, knew Latin... but for real. "The Oxford style is not lying, it's irony."  1) "The most pro-Brexit degree among 2016 MPs was Classical Literature, very private school... If you came from the right class, Classical Literature was the most common degree and had inordinate prestige. Such was the importance of Latin that it had been part of the entrance requirements for Cambridge and Oxford until 1960. Francis Crick, who did not bother to learn the language, failed the entrance exams for both. Instead, he went to University College London before co-discovering the structure of DNA. In the Oxbridge chivalric tradition, the more useless the degree, the more elegant it was. As the poet Louis MacNeice noted, 'Not everyone has the privilege of learning a language that is incontrovertibly dead."  2) "Since Latin and Greek were taught mainly in private schools, they became markers of the ruling class, as Johnson well knows when he recites The Iliad in public. Indeed, during his time as mayor of London, Johnson hired his former Oxford tutor, Jasper Griffin, to provide him with passages from classical literature that he could include in his speeches."  Recounts historian Colin Shrosbree: "Classical Literature served the same sociological function in Victorian England as calligraphy did in ancient China: to regulate and limit entry to the ruling elite."  What more can we say? Tempus fugit and alea iacta est.  The interview  We spoke with British journalist Simon Kuper (Kampala, 1969). QUESTION. The mannerisms of Oxford's 1980s elites seem like a self-parody of the decline of the British Empire, don't they?  ANSWER. Sort of. Boris Johnson's generation grew up listening to tales of British world dominance, but, when they reached positions of responsibility, they saw how small that power already was, how little room for maneuver within the EU, its waning military weight; so, they had a bit of a depression. Boris Johnson was born too late. Q. A century late?  A. Well, not that late, but a few decades late. In 1945, the British were still able to co-found the new world architecture, from the World Bank to the UN Security Council. But the loss of influence was abrupt, and the British had to deal with it emotionally, some more than others. Most citizens had not been brought up to rule the world, but Boris's generation had. If you were part of the Eton caste, your adult mission was to manage a superpower... which was no longer a superpower. Q. There's a quote in your book: "Once you've been through Oxford, you can never believe anything anyone says again. That, of course, is an advantage in a world like ours."What does this mean? Wasn't differentiating between truth and lies important in university debates?  A. The problem was not falsehoods. The Oxford style was not lying, but irony. Every discussion always has a humorous side and one should never take anything totally seriously. It was the logical leap for a country that went from making the big world decisions to dealing with more modest domestic issues. Irony of a superpower come to less. When you can no longer have momentous political debates, everything becomes a bit of a joke. There were no strong ideological positions in Oxford either, communism and fascism were never dominant, irony above all. Q. You say that in the debating club you were prepared to defend an argument and its opposite. When Boris Johnson decided to jump on Brexit with doubts and suspense, they say you prepared two different articles for the Daily Telegraph, one for and one against. Very Oxford, isn't it?  A. One hundred percent Oxford. Johnson is the most extreme and parodic model of the Oxford style. So much so that it's almost unfair of me to use him as an example. No one has ever been as exaggeratedly Oxford as Boris. If Johnson had decided to go against Brexit, he would certainly have been the most eloquent and witty of his critics...and who knows if the UK would not remain in the EU. Most of the characters in my book are Brexit believers, but Boris is not, his ideology tends towards zero. Boris believes in almost nothing. Q. Does Boris only believe in himself?  A. Yes, he does. Q. Is the Boris who becomes prime minister the Boris of Oxford or has he changed a bit? I'm talking mostly about his tricks and his rhetorical skills.  A. He hasn't changed much, there has been almost no evolution in his last forty years, because, as a twenty-year-old, he was already a charismatic guy at Oxford, he had a successful style, he already saw politics with self-destructive irony. Everyone at Oxford thought Boris was very funny, and to be seen that way was very important. One usually comes out of university still green for an adult working career, but not Johnson, who at Oxford already had his style and his network of contacts in place. Q. In the book you talk a lot about what Oxford brings to politicians (rhetorical skills and network of contacts), but...  A. And credibility. When the voter sees that the politician comes from Oxford, he tends to value him more. Q. But, besides politicians, what extra did Oxford give to journalists?   A. In fact, Johnson was a journalist before he was a politician, and he was not the only one. At Oxford they teach you to speak and write well and with self-confidence... on subjects you don't know anything about. When I read The Economist, with its fluent and elegant argumentation, it quickly detected Oxford's assets. You may not control the subject well, but your style will impress the reader. At Oxford I learned exactly that: to express myself with poise and sophistication on subjects I didn't know much about. Maybe I'm not so different from Boris Johnson... Q. The image of Oxford as the kingdom of the humanities can be seen as an educational imbalance with respect to the sciences, but also with a certain nostalgia, now that the humanities are in crisis. In Spain, for example, philosophy is on the decline in schools.  "The British believe that Brexit has been a mistake; even those who voted for it, even if they don't recognize it, are disappointed"  A. There is a general decline in the humanities. In American universities fewer and fewer people want to study English literature or history, and some scientific branches are now more relevant. The thing is that Oxford's cult of the humanities is tied to social class. Who can afford to study socially irrelevant languages like classical Greek or Latin? Only a true gentleman can afford it. Greek, Latin or history used to be pampered subjects in private schools, partly because of British reverence for the past and its anti-modern tics. But things have also changed at Oxford, where the most popular degree now is Economics and Business Administration, which didn't exist when I studied. The humanities are in decline even at Oxford. Q. David Cameron, the Conservative prime minister who launched the Brexit referendum, called for a no vote and lost it, is now back as foreign secretary of a UK outside the EU. How does this eat into it? Is it a closing of the loop? The ultimate irony of Brexit?  A. It is a sign of how flawed the process has been. Most Britons believe that Brexit has been a mistake; even those who voted for it, even if they don't openly acknowledge it, deep down inside they are disappointed, they no longer believe in it. But the circle will not close until we return to the EU, which may end up happening many years from now.  Another conclusion from Cameron's comeback is that if you are part of a certain caste, you will always get a second chance, even if the first one ended in disaster. You meet the prime minister, the prime minister meets you, and you end up getting a new chance. A political career ends if you make a colossal mistake... unless you belong to the British upper class, in which case, an exception will be made. There will always be a refuge for you in the Conservative Party.  When old Winston Churchill reflected on British rhetoric, you had to listen to him. During a visit to a university debating club, the Oxford Union, Churchill told student Quintin Hogg (later a Tory minister), "In this country, if you can talk, you can do anything."  Load-Date: November 24, 2023  End of Document
