   THE FISHER QUEEN: NAVIGATING A WAY OUT OF MARINE'S STORMY WATERS; Ireland's fishermen have been buffeted by Brexit - but Bord Iascaigh Mhara CEO Caroline Bocquel tells Fearghal O'Connor that she can see big opportunities ahead Sunday Independent June 18, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS;NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 1491 words Byline: Fearghal O'Connor Body   Standing on her office balcony in Dún Laoghaire, Caroline Bocquel points out the handful of fishing boats in the harbour below - hardly noticeable amongst the pleasure craft and harbour vessels. "There's not as many as there used to be," says the CEO of Bord Iascaigh Mhara (BIM), who was appointed in January. She has just led the way from the BIM building's reception area through a warren of wood-panelled hallways, past doorways where officials plotted the sometimes stormy course of Irish fishing since the 1950s. It's not hard to imagine a previous generation of men in suits inhabiting these offices, talking about Ireland's accession to the EEC, and how it might impact the country's fishing industry. Bocquel had eagerly led the way to the large balcony that runs the length of the huge window in her new office. There is an incredible - perhaps unrivalled - view of Dún Laoghaire Harbour with Dublin Bay beyond, spread out like a canvas. But the view is only temporary, she says. The building is lavish - in an outdated, Mad Men-type of way - and unsuitable now for the needs of a state body which looks to meet and collaborate with a complex and multifaceted industry sector in the 21st century. It is to be returned to the charge of the Office of Public Works, in favour of new offices somewhere nearby. "We are hoping to move probably within the next six months or so," she says. She had already set tongues wagging by moving the large desk from the position it had occupied for decades. It now gives her a more commanding view down the corridor, rather than out the window. "We are waiting for approval at the moment. The offices are of their time. They are in this beautiful, iconic building - but they are not quite right for us now." The move will be good for the organisation in the context of a changing industry, she says. "There is a sense of a restart." The raw data suggests that seafood is an industry in good health. It employs 15,000 people and is worth (EURO)1.3bn, growing 4pc in value terms last year. With global demand for protein predicted to double by 2050, and with three billion people, mainly in Asia, reliant on seafood as their main protein source, the potential for much greater growth is huge, says Bocquel. And yet, in recent months in particular, many Irish fishermen and their families have voiced a sense of hopelessness and abandonment. Some claim to have been "sold out" by the Brexit deal, which brought a huge (EURO)43m per annum cut to Ireland's overall fishing quota, putting their livelihoods at risk. Bocquel accepts that the mood amongst fishermen in places like Castletownbere and Dunmore East is dark. "There is no doubt that Brexit has been devastating for the www.sector.No doubt about that at all. We're in a position that there is not enough quota available for the amount of boats there are," she says. Fishing, she agrees, is more than a career. For many families, who have been generations in the sector, it is a vocation. To try to deal with this, a (EURO)75m voluntary decommissioning process - funded by the (EURO)1bn Ireland received from the EU's Brexit Adjustment Reserve (BAR) fund and administered by BIM - has been established to financially compensate fishermen who agree to decommission their boats. Fishermen have been very critical of all this - and Bocquel acknowledges the fact, adding that Brexit and its fallout was not something anyone in the sector would have chosen. "This is a really necessary rebalancing. And, yes, you're right, I think there's been a lot of negativity as we go through that decommissioning process - which we're nearly at the end of now." The process will see the decommissioning of 42 of Ireland's fleet of 200 whitefish boats, which catch species such as cod, hake and monkfish. It will release (EURO)30m worth of quota for redistribution amongst the remaining boats, making them more viable. "Those who have volunteered to decommission boats will have some money to pay off loans, or start a new business in the wider fishing or marine sector, or in tourism - whatever they choose. For example, I know of one lady in Waterford who is using some of her compensation to open a fish restaurant." But the quota cut also has big implications for the more than 100 seafood processors around Ireland too. "There is no doubt that, because of Brexit, we've got a reduced amount of raw material. There are much less fish coming in. So what we're doing is working with companies to add more value to that raw material. The days of catching it, freezing it and shipping it - basically treating it like a commodity - are over. It's all about adding value." A further (EURO)45m is to be invested by BIM into helping processors scale-up and invest in new technology to allow them compete in global markets, particularly in Asia. "(EURO)45m may sound like a small number compared to other sectors. But for this sector, it's a phenomenal amount - compared to the (EURO)2m annually BIM would usually invest in the processing sector. It is absolutely transformative." She cites one company in Killybegs - Donegal Fish - which, instead of freezing its mackerel for direct shipping to markets such as Nigeria and Egypt, is now preparing it to exact specifications, using semi automated production lines and aiming at the Japanese consumer food market. "That has been transformative for them, and they're getting five or six times what they used get for the mackerel." In Kilmore Quay in Wexford, another processor - Sofrimar - had to rethink its whelk exports after sushi bars in Asia shut their doors during Covid. They began to cook the whelk before shipping - and discovered a huge consumer appetite for it in Vietnam. "So we're now grant-aiding window their Sunday Independent BUSINESS INTERVIEW says. a The them to build a new factory," she says. "We have a large number of clients in the sector now taking advantage of the Brexit Adjustment Reserve, to make these sort of big one-off investments." Apart from this drive to increase technology, she believes the processing sector is also heading for a period of consolidation. "What we need to do is really work with the processors to see what their own business aspirations are. Undoubtedly, there are some processors who would be very open to consolidating. We're also working with the Strategic Investment Fund, who are really interested in seeing how they can play a part in this." Bocquel grew up beside the sea in Baltray, Co Louth, falling in love with sailing before becoming an accountant. Her Dad worked in Aer Rianta, which fostered in her a love of travel. She worked for a time at a dotcom venture in California, before returning to Dublin to take a job as financial controller in Capital Bars, which at the time had a hand in 17 different bars, restaurants and hotels in the city. But it was her 17 years as director of corporate services at the Marine Institute that really changed her view of what the oceans around us had to offer. "One of my first tasks was to sail home on the maiden voyage of the institute's new research ship, the Celtic Explorer, from Bergen in Norway. I loved working there, and it helped me appreciate how, as a nation, we had turned our back on the sea." In 2019 she was approached by aid agency Goal to become CFO, and she decided it was time for a change. She spent two years with Goal, travelling to Zimbabwe and Iraq to observe some of the work undertaken by the charity's 4,000 people based in the field. But when a vacancy arose at BIM, she couldn't resist a return to the marine sector. Her skill set and financial background were a good fit. "People in this sector are looking to optimise their businesses and need good support in terms of business plans, organisation and market insights. I understand marine, having been in it for 20 years, but my financial background is really important. Businesses in this sector need the strategy, structure and the finance to execute their plans." Change is inevitable in the sector. Globally, 50pc of seafood is as a result of aquaculture and that's projected to grow to about 62pc, as it's a cost-effective way to meet growing global protein needs. It is much smaller in Ireland - more like 10pc, mainly in salmon, oysters and mussels - but Bocquel sees it as a major growth sector. Planning difficulties and environmental hurdles have meant Irish aquaculture expansion, particularly in salmon, has been slow - but she says there has been progress. CURRICULUM VITAE Name: Caroline Bocquel Age: 49 From: Baltray, Co Louth Lives: Greystones, Co Wicklow Family: Married to Jean-Marie, who is from Brittany - they met on a sailing boat. They've one son, Alexander. Education: A degree in Business and Languages from Technological University Dublin. Favourite hobby: Sailing a 30 foot J109 (she previously completed the Fastnet Race). Favourite book: In Extremis: The Life of War Correspondent Marie Colvin by Lindsey Hilsum Favourite movie: French film Les Choristes Graphic    Caroline Bocquel, chief executive of Bord Iascaigh Mhara, at Dún Laoghaire harbour. Picture by Frank McGrathharbour. Picture by Frank McGrath Load-Date: June 18, 2023  End of Document
