   The Republic's belief in united Ireland in next decade waning, survey reveals; Special report Only one in four RoI respondents in poll by European Movement Ireland back possibility Belfast Telegraph July 3, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4,5 Length: 598 words Byline: Garrett Hargan Body   A RAPIDLY declining number of people in the Republic believe a united Ireland is possible in the next 10 years, according to a new poll. While almost half (45%) of people in Northern Ireland can see a united Ireland in the EU within the next decade, just one in four people (24%) in the Republic hold the same view - a significant drop of seven points on last year. A majority of Northern Irish respondents also believe that Northern Ireland is worse off since Brexit (66%), according to the survey released by European Movement Ireland. Only 14% in Northern Ireland and 9% in the Republic of Ireland believe that Northern Ireland is doing better since Brexit. The poll is the first dedicated all-island opinion poll on EU issues and was conducted by Amárach Research, with data collection in Northern Ireland undertaken by LucidTalk. It shows that a majority (64%) of respondents who say they voted 'Leave' in the Brexit referendum believe Northern Ireland is doing worse since Brexit. Support for the Republic remaining a member of the EU stands at 79% in Northern Ireland, while 58% believe the EU is moving in the right direction. The poll also shows that 71% of people who say they voted Leave in the Brexit referendum support the Republic remaining a member of the EU. Three-quarters of people in Northern Ireland (74%) and 51% in the Republic believe that Northern Ireland should be represented in the European Parliament. Commenting on the findings, Noelle O Connell, CEO of European Movement Ireland, said: "This is our tenth year producing an annual opinion poll on EU issues and the first time we have included Northern Ireland in the findings. "Since Brexit, the relationship between people in Northern Ireland and the European Union has been uncertain and we think it's important to measure public sentiment towards the major issues affecting the relationship between the European Union and this island. "What's surprising is the large jump of people in Ireland (RoI) in one year - up from 43% to 58%; [18% said they didn't know] - who don't believe there will be a united Ireland in the next 10 years. "This is particularly noteworthy as the responses on this issue remained relatively constant over three years, with about onethird of people in Ireland (RoI) saying they believed there would be a united Ireland in the European Union. "This compares to 45% in Northern Ireland who believe there will be a united Ireland in the EU in the next 10 years. "Meanwhile, about one in 10 in both Northern Ireland and Ireland (RoI) believe that Northern Ireland is doing better since Brexit, with the number of people thinking it is doing worse far higher in Northern Ireland at 66%." Ms O Connell added: "Some 66% of respondents in Northern Ireland say they could not be convinced that Ireland would be better off outside of the EU. "Of these, more than half (55%) who say they voted Leave in the Brexit referendum now say they could not be convinced Ireland would be better off outside of the EU." When considering important policy areas for the EU, environment is ranked in first place by respondents in Northern Ireland, followed by healthcare. Some 60% of respondents said they feel more politically, socially and culturally close to Europe, compared to 30% who answered Great Britain. The poll also suggests that 22% of people in Northern Ireland say they trust the UK Government the most, while 44% say they trust the EU, and 34% say they trust the Irish Government. Some 70% of respondents in Northern Ireland also felt they should have representatives sitting as MEPs in the European Parliament. Graphic    Noelle O Connell, CEO of European Movement Ireland Load-Date: July 3, 2023  End of Document
