   Thought Brexit was difficult? Reversing it could be even trickier i-news July 7, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 13 Length: 824 words Byline: Arj Singh Body   Support for rejoining the EU has been growing in recent weeks amid economic turmoil in the UK. YouGov's Brexit tracker last month found that 58.2 per cent of Britons would now vote to rejoin, one of the highest levels recorded since the 2016 referendum. It is an issue that most leading Westminster politicians have handled with all the enthusiasm they would muster for an unexploded bomb. But there are signs the political weather on Brexit may finally be shifting, with Labour under pressure to adopt a more radical policy and a senior Tory calling on both main parties to admit leaving the EU was a mistake. However, rejoining would be a complicated and protracted process for the UK, fraught with practical and political stumbling blocks. The first stage - meeting the criteria for joining, including promoting EU values such as freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and human rights, as well as having a functioning market economy and the capacity to absorb Brussels law - is likely to be the easiest part. But even that will become steadily more difficult as the UK remains outside the EU and diverges from Brussels law to take advantage of Brexit freedoms, for example by allowing the gene editing of food. "The longer we leave it, the more complicated accession is because the more we diverge and the EU will have changed," says Professor Anand Menon, director of the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank. Once the UK believes it has met the criteria, it can then apply to Brussels to rejoin. This is where things start to get tricky, as each of the EU countries has a veto on the UK joining. Although Brussels would be keen to welcome back one of Europe's major economies, the EU - having been scarred by the tortured Brexit negotiations - "would need to see that it's absolutely the settled will of both major political parties and any conceivable government over the next 20-25 years and the British people that they would come in and stay in", says Jill Rutter, a former civil servant and senior fellow at the Institute for Government (IfG). Professor Menon also raises the prospect of the government applying to join, then negotiating the terms that it puts to British voters in a referendum - a potentially necessary political step given the majority vote to Leave, but one that would not be popular on the continent. Some EU states have particular agendas that could make British re-entry even more difficult. Spain could wield its veto as a means of reopening the status of Gibraltar. Professor Menon says there is already a "queue forming" to join the EU, with Ukraine and Western Balkan nations in the early stages of potential accession. This is likely to lead to "bruising" internal EU battles that make it "even harder and even longer" for the UK to get back in. If the UK did win permission to apply as an official candidate for membership, it would then enter negotiations with the EU on the terms of its accession. EU rules say all new member states must join the euro and the Schengen border-free travel zone, both of which the UK swerved when it was previously a member. It is highly likely that there would be attempts to negotiate new opt-outs for Britain. There is a kind of precedent as Denmark has an opt-out from the euro; Ireland, which is in a common travel area with the UK, is not subject to Schengen. But other states were already well-established members when they got their exemptions. There would also be intense negotiations over the UK's contributions to the EU budget. The idea of a British government regaining the "rebate" that reduced its contribution by about £5.6bn a year in today's prices seems highly unlikely. These negotiations could be "politically toxic", Professor Menon says. The negotiations are divided into six groups of EU law, in a process that the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank says implies a "six-year time frame" for completion. Agreements on all six groups of laws need separate unanimous approval by member states. However, experts view the prospect of actually rejoining as "remote". Professor Menon says: "There's an awful lot of political capital to be spending on something that's not going to bear a lot of fruit until after five or 10 years, which isn't how politicians act." The UK could seek other forms of closer association with the EU. The Government has recently briefed that a Swiss-style arrangement of multiple individual deals to ease trade and other co-operation was under consideration. But Brussels is not a fan of the Swiss approach, and single market membership is unlikely on anything more than a temporary basis. Most likely, Ms Rutter thinks, is a bespoke deal that eases trade but does not require the laborious rejoining process or that the UK accepts some of the most unpopular parts of EU membership, such as the free movement of people. "It's a very interesting question. In the long-run, what kind of requirements that were taken as given now come back into play?" Load-Date: July 6, 2023  End of Document
