   Tins of tuna sourced from Mauritius post-Brexit took nine months to reach NI Belfast Telegraph July 25, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 650 words Byline: Margaret Canning Body   TUNA from Mauritius, sourced as an alternative to Great Britain following Brexit, took nine months to reach its NI customer after a paperwork mistake, the Belfast Telegraph can reveal. Henderson Foodservice said it turned to Mauritius as a source because getting tinned tuna from Great Britain was no longer commercially viable under post-Brexit arrangements. But managing director Cathal Geoghegan, who's also the recently appointed president of the NI Chamber, said an order placed in September last year was not successfully delivered until June. Normally, deliveries from Mauritius would take two to three months, compared to two or three weeks for orders coming from Liverpool. He said the tins of tuna were initially turned away at Belfast Harbour as an administrator in Mauritius had ticked the destination box marked 'Great Britain' instead of 'UK'. "The key driver here was from a commercial perspective, as taking the tuna in from the previous Great Britain supply chain/ route would have resulted in an additional tariff payable of some 24%, which we would have had to unfortunately pass on to our customer base. Therefore our decision was focused on ensuring a competitive product price for our customer base." The tuna from Mauritius was finally delivered in June. "That's a live example of the bureaucracy of Brexit problems," said Mr Geoghegan. The business had been forced to find emergency sources of tuna at an inflated cost as a result of the error, he said. But Mr Geoghegan said he hoped the Windsor Framework could solve some of the problems of trading between Great Britain and NI since Brexit. However, he stressed it would not cure every ill: "Business needs to be part of the solutions and discussion with UK and EU government - and that's where the NI Chamber comes into its own." Checks on fish products entering ports are completed by councils under the authority of the Food Standards Agency (FSA). The FSA confirmed that Henderson Foodservice's shipment had been stopped, saying: "Consignments of products of animal origin, such as canned tuna, in line with official controls legislation governing imports, must be accompanied by an appropriate export health certificate certifying the product meets public health rules applicable within the country of import. "In this instance the certifying officer in the country of export completed an incorrect certificate and so it could not lawfully enter NI on first arrival." Mr Geoghegan was speaking as a House of Lords committee concluded that the Windsor Framework had improved upon the NI Protocol but that problems remain. Peers' report on the impact of the deal found benefits included easier movement of retail goods, agri-food produce, parcels, pets, and human medicines via the green lane. Goods being sent from GB can stay in the green lane if they are not being sent on to the Republic, while those at risk of being sent over the border will be placed in a red lane, subject to more checks. Peers cautioned that for some businesses the processes under the framework will be more burdensome than under the protocol as it is currently being implemented. That is because the protocol, as it stands, is still being operated inside grace periods and with exemptions. Mr Geoghegan confirmed the new green and red lanes meant different rules for different parts of the Henderson Group, which owns Henderson Foodservice. "We operate north and south of the border, whereas my sister business, Henderson Wholesale, which operates the Spar franchise in the north, solely operates north of the border. "All goods that Henderson Wholesale takes from Great Britain can come through the green channel. But unfortunately all goods that we take from the UK into NI for Henderson Foodservice will have to come through the red channel, because there is a risk that they will be sold in the Republic." 'Sourcing from GB would've meant an added tariff ' Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
