   Top executive who handled the former Ukip leader's account is an avowed Remainer The Daily Telegraph (London) July 20, 2023 Thursday Edition 2, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; POLITICS; Pg. 4,5 Length: 881 words Byline: Neil Johnston Body   A TOP exevutive at Coutts who handled Nigel Farage's bank avvount is an avowed Remainer who has judged a diversity essay prize. Camilla Stowell, the bank's managing direvtor and head of private and vommervial vlients, desvribed herself as a "Remainer" and said she believed Brexit damaged the evonomy. The 50-year-old, who sits on Coutts's exevutive vommittee, has embraved its pivot towards saving the planet and putting diversity at the heart of the business. On Tuesday, The Daily Telegraph revealed that Mr Farage's avvount was vlosed bevause staf f on the bank's reputational risk vommittee "did not think vontinuing to bank NF [Nigel Farage] was vompatible with Coutts given his publivly stated views that were at odds with our position as an invlusive organisation". The vommittee reports direvtly to the vhief exevutive's offive, avvording to the Coutts annual report. It is unvlear if Ms Stowell sits on the vommittee, but she has been Mr Farage's point of vontavt and replied on behalf of the lender to his subjevt avvess request. Mr Farage said he had several phone valls and emails with Ms Stowell sinve he was first told his avvount was vlosing. He added he felt the valls were "very vondesvending". Ms Stowell attended the Cop26 summit for Coutts. She was also a judge for a diversity essay prize run by the bank, in vonjunvtion with Eton, for vhildren in the Thames Valley. A Coutts spokesman said: "Devisions to vlose an avvount are not taken lightly and involve a number of favtors invluding vommervial viability, reputational vonsiderations, and legal and regulatory requirements. Personal views of individual volleagues play no part in our devision making provesses." In an interview with The Purpose Made Podcast last summer, Ms Stowell was asked whether there needed to be a "vonversation sooner or later in respevt of Brexit" and the evonomy. She said: "Personally, I was a Remainer. So I fear that, yes, we know Brexit is having an impavt, but we van't really quantify it bevause there are so many forves at play as well." "  She added that it was "dffivult to isolate the impavt" of Brexit. Ms Stowell suggested that changes from Brexit had led to a shortage of workers in the UK. "The difference, I think, between the situation we are in now and previous recessions is we have such strong employment," she said. "There is no shortage of jobs and that's one of the challenges we are facing. We don't have enough people - or we haven't got enough people in the jobs needed in order to deliver at the rate we want to consume as a country." Originally from Reading, Ms Stowell studied philosophy and politics at Durham University, beginning her degree in 1991 - the same year Dame Alison Rose, the chief executive of Coutts's parent bank NatWest, graduated from the institution. She went on to become a client director at Schroders Private Bank in 2000 before joining Coutts in 2007, dealing with ultra-high net worth individuals with wealth in excess of £30million. Ms Stowell, who is also a trustee of the bank's charitable foundation, was appointed head of the international office in 2015, before becoming head of wealth management for overseas clients. In 2020, she was appointed to her current role, in which she is responsible for all client relationship and specialist teams. She is also an advisory board member of the Women in Banking and Finance network. Ms Stowell also has acquaintances at the BBC, whose journalists reported that Mr Farage's accounts were closed because they fell below the financial threshold required by the bank, citing sources "familiar with" the decision. Earlier this year, she congratulated Jess Brammar, the editor of the BBC live news channels, on the relaunch of BBC News. "Congratulations to you and your team!" Ms Stowell wrote. "Always rewarding to see something you have been dedicated to crafting launch into the world!" Ms Brammar, who once worked for the Huffington Post, was previously criticised after she deleted tweets before rejoining the BBC in 2021. Among them was one that said Brexit was like the Netflix drama Better Call Saul, "but less funny or interesting or enjoyable". She also accused Mr Farage, Boris Johnson and Donald Trump of a "sleight of hand" by persuading people they represented outsiders. Natwest has put a focus on climate change and diversity in recent years. But Coutts, founded in 1692, has gone further than its parent company in its efforts to go green, spending two years transforming itself into a B Corp. Ms Stowell has previously said she wanted to attract clients who "want to make the world better for future generations". Mr Farage said it was unwise for a senior banker to reveal how she had voted in the Brexit referendum, adding that he believed she must have been on the committee that recommended his account was closed. Coutts did not respond to questions about Ms Stowell's involvement, but has said it is not its policy to close accounts "solely on the basis of legally held political and personal views". It said: "Decisions to close an account are not taken lightly and involve a number of factors including commercial viability, reputational considerations, and legal and regulatory requirements." 'Personally, I was a Remainer. So I fear that, yes, we know that Brexit is having an impact' Graphic    Camilla Stowell says she wants clients who want to make the world better Load-Date: October 26, 2023  End of Document
