   Tories seize on Starmer remarks over EU divergence; Bloc rules Financial Times (London, England) September 23, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 307 words Byline: GEORGE PARKER; PETER FOSTER; ANNA GROSS Body   Leading Conservatives launched a new attack on Sir Keir Starmer for wanting to "rejoin the EU in all but name" yesterday after the Labour leader said he did not want Britain to diverge from the bloc's rules. Starmer said last weekend that he wanted to rewrite Boris Johnson's Brexit deal with the EU and desired a "closer trading relationship". He also said he would not undercut the EU by diverging from its main standards, a comment that drew little attention at the time. Starmer said: "We don't want to diverge, we don't want to lower standards, we don't want to rip up environmental standards, working standards for people that work, food standards and all the rest of it." Although Labour said this was not a new policy, the comments, broadcast by Sky News on Thursday, were seized on by Tories as evidence of an increasingly warm approach to the EU. James Cleverly, foreign secretary, said: "Keir voted Remain. Then he backed a second referendum. Then he didn't. Now he wants to rejoin the EU in all but name. What does Labour stand for?" Michael Gove, levelling up secretary, said Starmer wanted to "return us to the EU effectively and he wants to rerun the Brexit agonies of the past". Chancellor Jeremy Hunt said Starmer's comments were likely to "worry a lot of people" that "what he really wants to do is unpick Brexit". The attacks were a sign of how Starmer's bolder approach on Brexit are likely to feature in the general election. Responding to critics yesterday, Starmer said he believed there was "no case for rejoining the EU, no case for the customs union or single market". Labour said: "The Tories have not used Brexit to diverge on food, environmental or labour standards and if they have a plan to do so then they should come clean with people." It added: "We have left the European Union and we are not going back in any form." Load-Date: September 22, 2023  End of Document
