   Tories turn guns on 'Sir Shifty' Keir and promise Rishi 'won't mess public around'; CONSERVATIVE FIGHTBACK BEGINS Sunday Express October 1, 2023 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 1353 words Byline: David Williamson Body   KEIR Starmer was branded "Sir Shifty" yesterday as senior Tories warned voters: "You cannot trust this man." In a blistering attack, they portrayed the Labour leader as a serial flip-flopper who hates Brexit and is a danger to Britain. And they painted a nightmare vision of a Starmer-led country with open-door migration, more 20mph traffic zones and militant unions calling the shots. Tory chairman Greg Hands tore into Sir Keir on the eve of what may be the party's last conference before the general election. And he declared: "Sir Keir fundamentally cannot be trusted. "People distrust him because of his flip-flops on nearly every issue. "In the last eight years, virtually everything Keir Starmer has ever stood for is the opposite of what he has stood for previously. "He was the leading exponent of a second Brexit referendum - and now he's talking about wanting to see the benefits of Brexit. "He was against tuition fees - now he's back in favour of tuition fees. "Only four years ago he wanted to see Jeremy Corbyn as prime minister - now he doesn't even want to see him as an MP. "He's aged 61 and he's had multiple positions just in his 50s. "This is not somebody who people can trust." The gloves came off in what is the start of what could be a 12-month phony election war before Britain goes to the polls. Mr Hands - who is at the heart of preparations for the election expected in the next year - describes Rishi Sunak as a man who "won't mess you around". And he says the PM is fighting hard to defeat the people smugglers who send migrants on the treacherous journey in small boats across the Channel. The Tories' chances of staying in power are likely to hinge on whether voters decide Mr Sunak and not Sir Keir can best deliver the stability and growth the country needs. The Conservatives' reputation for stable government was dealt a blow with the sudden collapse of Boris Johnson's and Liz Truss's administrations and the economic turmoil that followed. But the party is planning to tell voters that if they keep Mr Sunak No10 he will be there for the whole parliamentary term. Mr Hands said: "We will go into the next election looking for a fullterm for Rishi as Prime Minister. That, I think, is going to be an essential part of the offer." A key challenge is convincing the nation the Tories are not clapped out and that it is not time for a change. The party chairman warned Opposition parties could inflict long-term damage on the UK if they take power. And he also raised the spectre of a Labour-Liberal Democrat-SNP "woke coalition". He fears if Sir Keir teamed up with the Lib Dems' Sir Ed Davey these "two knights" would lower the voting age, replace the electoral system and "change Britain permanently for the worse". Mr Hands claimed there is "real concern" a Labour government would turbo-charge woke policies and argues the party's "heart is basically not in the right place to start with". He said Labour would "undoubtedly" kill the Government's flagship scheme to send asylum seekers to Rwanda for proin cessing. Sir Keir, he said, may support Arsenal, a team whose kit features a slogan encouraging people to "Visit Rwanda", but "I don't think he wants anybody to go there". People smugglers, he argued, are in no doubt about who represents the biggest threat to their illegal enterprise. "I think the criminal smugglers will be thinking that their biggest enemies at the moment are Rishi Sunak, Suella Braverman and the Conservative Government," Mr Hands said. "Those are the only people trying to stop them." He claimed people "strongly have the feeling Keir Starmer doesn't even want to try". And the personal attacks are likely to intensify as the election races closer. Mr Hands said the party conference, which begins in Manchester today, could be the last before the election. Labour has sought to portray Sir Keir as a responsible former director of public p rosecutions whose humble upbringing has given him a clear understanding of the concerns of ordinary people. Mr Hands and his colleagues want to brand him as "just a Camden Lefty" who lacks conviction. And Conser vatives are in a battle to stop former Labour voters who backed Mr Johnson in 2019 drifting back to Sir Keir's party. Lambasting his record on Britain's decision to leave the EU as "very, very shifty", Mr Hands said: "He's clearly somebody who hates Brexit. "I wouldn't be at all surprised if he tries to take Britain into some sort of customs arrangeactually ment with the European Union." He also has a clear message for Tories who are tempted to vote for Reform UK, the rebranded Brexit Party. "The person most cheering on anybody considering voting Reform is Sir Keir Starmer," Mr Hands said. "That is the person who most wants people to vote Reform because he knows it will make it more likely he can get into Downing Street by stealth." Before then there is the challenge of winning by-elections in the constituencies formerly held by Nadine Dorries and Chris Pincher. And he cannot afford to neglect his own seat of Chelsea and Fulham, which is considered a target for Labour. "I don't take anything for granted," Mr Hands said. Despite Labour routinely enjoying a poll lead of around 20 points, the 57-year-old insists he believes another Conservative majority government remains possible. "Absolutely," Mr Hands said. "Absolutely. Absolutely." What do you think - DO YOU TRUST SIR KEIR'S LABOUR PARTY TO RUN COUNTRY? YES - 0901 133 4421 ? text SXYES to 63333 NO - 0901 133 4422 ? text SXNO to 63333 Texts and calls cost 50p plus network access charge. You must have the bill payer's permission. Vote closes at midnight tonight. SP: Spoke, 0333 202 3390. Express Newspapers may contact you by post, SMS and/or email with offers, goods or services that may be of interest to you. To stop receiving SMS messages please text 'NSNOINFO' to the originating number. THE TRIPLE THREAT TO LABOUR Johnson's former seat of uxbridge and South ruislip. AN END TO CHAOS rishi Sunak will probably breathe a sigh of relief when he reaches his first anniversary in the top job on October 25. With around 450,000 people signing a petition in protest at Welsh Labour's introduction of a 20mph speed limit in residential areas, Tories hope to convert this anger into electoral energy. Mr Hands said: "Labour's natural instinct is to clobber motorists. They don't like motorists to start with; they don't like private property... all recent Tory prime ministers have left in unhappy circumstances. david Cameron resigned after failing to persuade Britons to stay in the Eu; Theresa May failed to deliver a Brexit deal that could command the support of her party; Boris Johnson was hit with mass resignations in the wake of the Chris pincher scandal; and Liz Truss quit after weeks of economic and political chaos. "I think if they took over the united Kingdom it would be a disaster for people using their cars getting around the country." a clear message will be sent to voters that if they back Mr Sunak at the next election they can expect him to be in number 10 for the full term. He will be presented as a force of stability and not another politician destined to be ousted. BUST BIRMINGHAM The financial crisis that has seen Birmingham city council effectively go bankrupt in the wake of equal pay claims has been seized on as an example of Labour mismanagement. as party chairman Greg Hands puts it, the prospect of a "full-term for Rishi as Prime Minister. " will be "an essential part of the offer." . Mr Hands said: "Bankrupt Birmingham is what a lot of people fear a future Labour government would do - leave the country with no money. They've done it time and time again." THE VROOM FACTOR Conser vatives are relentlessly wooing motorists. Fury at Labour Mayor of London Sadiq Khan's introduction of charges for more polluting vehicles is considered a key reason why the Tories were able to hold on to Boris Claiming there is a "deep fear in the country about Labour and a deep concern that they will not be able to run the place properly, particularly when it comes to the finances", he said: "don't let Labour do again what they've done in the past." Graphic    CAN'T BE TRUSTED: Labour leader Keir Starmer is unreliable, say Conser vativesPicture: TIM MERRY Load-Date: October 1, 2023  End of Document
