   Tory ministers refuse to appear on Question Time Brexit special The National (Scotland) June 22, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 289 words Byline: Ross Hunter Body   TORY ministers have been accused of cowardice after it was revealed that no senior government representative will appear on a BBC Question Time special. The audience on tonight-s special programme will be made up entirely of people who voted for Brexit to mark seven years since the UK voted to leave the European Union. However, former Labour spin doctor Alastair Campbell, who will be part of tonight-s panel, took to Twitter to express his surprise that no UK Government ministers would be joining him. -So the government won-t have a representative on BBC Question Time tonight. -Quite something that seven years on from their flagship -achievement- they can-t face an audience made up entirely of people voted for it. Anyone would they were frit as Maggie used to say-. Fiona Bruce is set to host the programme from Clacton-on-Sea in Essex, where nearly three-quarters of people voted for the UK to leave the EU. Tory backbencher John Redwood will be on the panel alongside Campbell, Labour MP Jenny Chapman, Professor Anand Menon, and the businessman Ben Habib. It comes after a poll found from Menon-s think tank UK in a Changing Europe found that only one in every five people who voted for Brexit believe things are going well. However, 61% believed it would -turn out well in the end-. READ MORE: BBC Scotland weather map blunder puts Lerwick in Western Isles Speaking about the results of the poll, Menon said: -While very few people think Brexit is going well, a large number of leavers also believe it is still too soon to make a definitive judgment. -Many leave voters believe Brexit has not been a success because politicians have let them down. The danger is that this will lead to an erosion of faith in politics and politicians.- Load-Date: June 22, 2023  End of Document
