   Tory urges rethink on joining single market i-news July 4, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 9 Length: 617 words Byline: Francis Elliott Body   Asenior Tory has called for both main parties to show the courage and strength of character to admit that Brexit has failed and seek to rejoin the EU single market. Tobias Ellwood, Conservative chairman of the defence select committee, says many MPs privately agree with the case for a Norway-style relationship with the EU but are too scared to say so. Speaking to i, Ellwood, 56, also predicts the main Ukraine counteroffensive operation will start within weeks and warns that a wounded Vladimir Putin will "stoop low" to cling to power. And he makes the economic case for an immediate increase in defence spending, saying the invasion has revealed that the country is particularly exposed to increasing global instability. Mr Ellwood was an early and prominent critic of Brexit and among the first Conservatives to call for Boris Johnson to quit. He remains the only Tory MP to call publicly for the UK to consider rejoining the single market. "The last couple years have been pretty miserable. I questioned why I'm in politics when the political party I align myself to has lost sight perhaps of its function, its purpose, its identity," the Bournemouth East MP says. He praises Rishi Sunak for showing "statecraft" for getting the Windsor Framework on trading arrangements with Northern Ireland through and says he believes he can lead the Tories to victory at the next election - but only if he's given the chance by Mr Johnson's allies. Mr Ellwood criticises Nadine Dorries for delaying her resignation, meaning that Mr Sunak faces the distraction of yet another by-election this autumn after the three contests later this month. "It's just astonishing that she's willing to do that knowing that means another by-election and that we need a clear road to land our policies [with voters]," he said. For Mr Ellwood, Brexit has become the issue that dare not speak its name. "Nobody dares mention Brexit on the Labour or Conservative side or look at the numbers to see whether economically it would be wiser for us to be in or outside of the single market," he says. "Surely we should have that strength of character, the courage to look at the biggest generational decision which has now clearly not gone in the right direction. I didn't know anybody who voted Remain or Brexit, who expected us to be where we are today, but we dare not go there." In addition to the economic damage leaving the single market has caused, Brexit has left the UK isolated from its allies just as the world is becoming more dangerous, he says. Ben Wallace, the Defence Secretary, failed in his attempt to become the new Nato secretary general because the UK is no longer in the EU, Mr Ellwood says. Mr Ellwood urges the public not to expect a swift end to the war in Ukraine. "The main Ukrainian armoured brigades haven't even launched. Ukraine have been testing the strengths and the weaknesses and of course waiting for more battle tanks and for F-16s. "There's likely to be a significant offensive operation involving a number of armoured brigades within the next month." Mr Ellwood, who accurately predicted the invasion 18 months ago in an earlier interview with i, added: "We need to be patient. World War II didn't end with the D-Day landings, there was Operation Market Garden, crossing the Rhine, the taking of Berlin and so on." Last week's mutiny has wounded Mr Putin and the Russian President would "stoop low" he warned, making the world an even more dangerous place. That's why, he says, the Treasury needs to find the funds to increase defence spending above 2.5 per cent of GDP now rather than only when the economy improves. Brexit has left the UK isolated from its allies just as the world is becoming more dangerous Load-Date: July 3, 2023  End of Document
