   True colours: how clothes got political; Exhibitions | Fashion has long been a platform for protest and propaganda, writes Annachiara Biondi Financial Times (London, England) September 23, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Asian Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LIFE AND ARTS;FEATURES; Pg. 4 Length: 1205 words Byline: Annachiara Biondi Body   P olitical allegiances were easy to spot on the streets of Paris in the 1780s. People who donned sophisticated French styles were in favour of the waning monarchy; those who opted for caped English greatcoats and dark suits were sympathetic to the democratic cause. As Aileen Ribeiro chronicles in her 1988 book Fashion in the French revolution, Frenchmen of the time rejected the style of formal dress associated with the royal court in favour of the more egalitarian English style, as well as patriotic uniforms, tricolour accessories and more natural hairstyles. "In order to show their attachment to the Democracy [they] have sacrificed their curls, toupees and queues; some of them go about with cropped locks like English farmers without any powder, and others wear little black scratch wigs," noted William Wellesley-Pole, third earl of Mornington, in 1790. Fashion can be frivolous but it can also be part of how we express belonging, political ideals and religious faith. Time and again, clothing has been used as a tool of oppression and control and, conversely, as a way to convey discontent and defiance. The Fabric of Democracy, an exhibition opening at the Fashion and Textile Museum in London this month, aims to explore the age-old connection between clothing and politics, focusing specifically on how textiles have been used by states and regimes for propaganda, starting with the mechanisation of textile production in the mid-18th century and ending with a tea towel featuring Boris Johnson and the slogan "Got Brexit Done". "Textiles can be very highly politically charged items," says curator Amber Butchart. "They have historically been quite feminised and with that there is this idea that they are benign objects. I wanted to challenge those assumptions." Most of the items in the exhibition are associated with the domestic sphere, such as soft furnishings and clothing. "I was interested to explore how propaganda has operated in the home and on the body," continues Butchart. Among her finds are a British headscarf from the second world war which encourages people to "salvage your rubber"; a handkerchief that was dropped over Korea during the Korean war by Chinese People's Volunteers with slogans such as "Stop the war, it's no disgrace to quit fighting in this unjust war. Leave Korea to the Koreans"; and a Japanese kimono featuring images of tanks, planes, guns and views of the Great Wall of China, a reference to a campaign initiated by the Japanese army in the country in 1933. While propaganda is the focus of the Fashion and Textile Museum exhibition, clothing has also been used for protests extensively throughout history. In Maoist China, where flair in dressing was considered a bourgeois sin, citizens took to altering collars, sleeves and the length of trousers, as well as fashioning hair ribbons and hair clips, as a sign of resistance to the uniformity demanded by the ruling Communist party. During the same era, leftwing youths in the west adopted the Mao suit in the fight against their own countries' political and economic establishments. In France in 2018, yellow high-vis vests, or gilets jaunes (which all motorists in the country must keep in their car by law) became the symbol of anti-government protests. Last year, after the death of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini in police custody in Iran, women across the country took off their hijabs and burnt them in protest. During the 1960s and 1970s, new forms of dress were embraced by both women and men as part of the women's liberation movement, which brought a reckoning about how dress codes often reinforced the patriarchal system. In the US, for example, simple acts such as women choosing to wear trousers or men sporting long hair were considered such a challenge to the establishment that, between 1965 and 1978, 84 court cases were brought by employers, schools and the military on these matters. "The fashion controversies of the 1960s and 1970s - for example, whether women should wear pants to work, or if boys' long hair or girls' miniskirts disrupted education - were not about lifestyle," writes Jo B Paoletti in Sex and Unisex: Fashion, Feminism, and the Sexual Revolution. "What the gender trends in women's clothing reveal is the opening of a conversation about femininity ... amid an even more serious discussion of women's place in society." Examples of clothing used as a protest against the status quo emerge from another show, Women in Revolt!, the first major exhibition of feminist art by women artists working in the UK, opening in November at Tate Britain. The show includes photographs of the women who converged on Greenham Common air base in southern England in 1982 to protest against the deploylabelled ment of 96 US Tomahawk nuclear cruise missiles there. The women knitted slogans and symbols on their handmade jumpers, transforming them into wearable banners. "If you are into ecology you are not going to buy a throwaway T-shirt to campaign, you are going to hand-make something that will last and is functional, practical and warm. For the Greenham women [knitwear] is a tool and also a sensible mode of production, so it makes sense to use that medium to get their message across," says curator Linsey Young. Other artists included in Women in Revolt!, such as Margaret Harrison and Cosey Fanni Tutti, used images of women and men in revealing clothing and suggestive poses to reflect on the male gaze, expressions of sexuality, the portrayal of women by the media and issues of control over images and the body. Both artists' work provoked outrage at the time: an exhibition by Harrison in London in 1971 was shut down by the police for indecency, while Cosey Fanni Tutti and her collective were "wreckers of civilisation" by MP Nicholas Fairbairn during a discussion in parliament prompted by their show at London's Institute of Contemporary Arts in 1976. The exhibition at the Fashion and Textile Museum ends with a reflection on today's political climate. Surprisingly, in the digital era, cloth and clothing still play a role in propaganda. The last section of the exhibition features a Tanzanian kanga from 2015, a printed cloth worn by women throughout east Africa, with a portrait of Barack Obama and a text in Swahili reading: "Congratulations Barack Obama". There is also a red Israeli kippah featuring an image of a smiling Donald Trump from 2019, a year after his controversial decision to move the US embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. The "Got Brexit Done" tea towel sits next to some anti-Brexit T-shirts created by London-based designer Katharine Hamnett, an example of how textiles are used for political messaging across the ideological spectrum. "Some people would say that those messages are propaganda as well," explains Butchart. "Propaganda is in the eye of the beholder. We tend to view our political rivals as people being involved in propaganda, not ourselves." 'The Fabric of Democracy: Propaganda Textiles from the French Revolution to Brexit', September 29 to March 3 2024, fashiontextilemuseum.org; 'Women in Revolt!', November 8 to April 7 2024, www.tate.org.uk 'If you are into ecology, you are not going to buy a throwaway T-shirt to campaign, you are going to hand-make something' Graphic    Clockwise from main: 'gilet jaune' demonstrators in Paris, 2018; Katharine Hamnett in one of her anti-Brexit shirts; a Boris Johnson tea towel from 2020; a second world war 'Salvage Your Rubber' scarf by Jacqmar; antinuclear protesters at Greenham Common - Patrick Zachmann/Magnum Photos; Future Publishing via Getty Images; Jonathan Richards; Alamy Load-Date: September 22, 2023  End of Document
