   UK expected Brexit to lower immigration. Reached a record high CE Noticias Financieras English June 5, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1008 words Body   Jun. 5 (Dow Jones) -- When the U.K. voted to leave the European Union in 2016, many supporters of the so-called Brexit hoped the move would reduce immigration by ending the right of residents of that association to move here freely, a trend that had been growing and that some Britons felt was taking jobs away from local citizens.      Instead, immigration has increased at a record level, as a growing number of immigrants from non-European countries has outpaced the decline of those from the European Union. Although the ruling Conservative Party has repeatedly pledged to reduce the number of migrants after Brexit, it has instead let in more from other countries in a bid to boost stagnant economic growth.      Data released by Office for National Statistics showed net migration during 2022 rose by 606,000, the largest increase on record. The figures do not include migrants who arrived illegally on boats across the English Channel, whose numbers rose 60% last year to a record high of around 45 thousand.      "The numbers are too high, it's as simple as that, and I want to reduce them," Prime Minister Rishi Sunak said recently.      The UK experience illustrates that even if industrialized nations want to curb migration and take drastic measures to do so, they may be hard pressed to allow it to avoid the economic damage of labor shortages. In the UK, the labor force is now smaller than it was before the pandemic, and some industries have complained that they cannot find enough workers.      It also underscores the political headache this trade-off presents. Thursday's immigration figures drew criticism among some Conservative Party lawmakers, who said voters wanted this influx reduced. Sunak's government announced new restrictions this week on how many family members visa students could bring into the country. Polls show that Britons have mixed views on whether immigrants are a blessing or not, but put a lot of weight on whether the government is seen as controlling the flow of people into Britain.      Contributing to the increase was the granting of humanitarian visas to some 300,000 people from Ukraine following the Russian invasion and from Hong Kong amid growing political repression in the former British colony. But it was also driven by a sharp increase in visas for students and workers from non-EU countries. About 136,000 visas were issued to students' families in 2022, an eight-fold increase from 2019.      Most economists agreed that Brexit would liberalize trade with the rest of the world, but would increase trade barriers with the European Union, Britain's largest trading partner, and that the net economic effect would be negative. Most economists also expected that more migration from the rest of the world would not be enough to offset the decline in European migrants, another net negative, said Jonathan Portes, an economist at King's College London who tracks immigration.      "We were right on the first part and wrong on the second," he said. "We were right about the basic economics, but a policy that we thought would be a modest liberalization [of migration with the rest of the world] has turned out to be de facto quite a significant liberalization," he said.      Whether the increase in numbers is part of a long-term trend is still too early to tell, said Madeleine Sumption, director of Oxford University's Migration Observatory. Many of the students who have come to the UK will eventually leave and there is likely to be less migration from Ukraine and Hong Kong in the next few years. That could reduce numbers towards the long-term average of around 200,000 to 250,000 a year.      Before Brexit, any EU citizen had the right to settle and work in the UK. During the referendum, the Leave campaign said the UK should have more control over who entered the country. After voting to leave the European Union, the U.K. government in 2021 introduced a new immigration system that only allowed entry to people who met certain criteria, such as being paid £26,200 a year, equivalent to $32,400, or having certain levels of qualifications. This system was intended to prevent a surplus of low-paid workers in the UK, which had fueled the backlash against immigration, while encouraging companies to invest more in their workforces and increase wages.      In 2022, total long-term immigration, measured as anyone staying for more than a year, was estimated at around 1.2 million. Of that total, 925,000 were from non-EU countries.      Even now, as the government has allowed more visas for higher-skilled jobs, from doctors to bankers, it has tried to resist letting in lower-skilled workers.      "What they're not willing to do, by and large, is open themselves up to low-wage jobs, which EU workers had previously done," said Brian Bell, chairman of the U.K. Migration Advisory Committee, which advises the government. It also meant that EU workers no longer had preferential access to the UK, which greatly increased the influx from countries such as India.      However, this new system was implemented just as worker shortages and high inflation began to take hold during the pandemic. The U.K. is the only major Western economy whose labor force remains smaller than it was before the pandemic, due to a combination of long-term illness, lower immigration from Europe and people retiring early. The Bank of England said that this shortage has stoked inflation as companies have been forced to raise wages to attract workers, while other companies simply cannot grow because they cannot find enough workers.      What is clear is that illegal migration has an impact on public opinion. The UK government has focused on stopping illegal migration, largely in the form of small boat crossings from France. Sunak has repeatedly pledged to crack down on this and has signed an agreement with France to help dismantle smuggling networks. The government also threatens to deport migrants who arrive illegally in the African country of Rwanda. This policy has so far been blocked by the courts.  Load-Date: June 6, 2023  End of Document
