   UK-wide referendum on NI Protocol a possibility, says Lord Frost Belfast Telegraph June 28, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 370 words Byline: Dominic McGrath Body   FORMER Brexit negotiator Lord Frost has floated the possibility of a future UK-wide referendum on Rishi Sunak's deal on the Northern Ireland Protocol, as he praised Boris Johnson's "firmness" on Brexit. Lord Frost admitted that the former prime minister had "weaknesses", but praised his belief in Brexit in his latest swipe at the current government, during remarks at a think-tank event. The peer, who was appointed to the Lords by Mr Johnson and acted as his Brexit negotiator, also accused ministers of acting like the decision to leave the EU was an "awkward embarrassment". Speaking at the Legatum Institute on yesterday, he called on Rishi Sunak to "double down" on the vision of the 2016 Brexit vote and the 2019 general election victory. "The 2016 referendum was a vote for change. But then old politics, in 2017 and 2018, messed it up," he said. "In 2019 that vote for change was renewed. We did then finally deliver our national independence. There was a huge opportunity. But old politics is messing it up again. "The Conservative Party may not - on current polling, will not - get a third chance." Repeating his call for a referendum on the European Convention on Human Rights, he also suggested a nationwide poll on the Brexit deal agreed between London and Brussels earlier this year amid efforts to address unionist concerns over the Northern Ireland Protocol. "In time, it will need a referendum across the UK on the Windsor Framework and the Northern Ireland Protocol, the last area where the UK Government does not have the final say on, is actually not in control of, what happens in that part of the country." Turning later to the issue of conservative leadership in the UK, Lord Frost said that Mr Johnson "undoubtedly had many weaknesses as a conservative leader". "One thing he did have, which was absolute firmness on Brexit and what Brexit meant, and the need not to retreat from it intellectually in any way," he continued. Lord Frost said that "steady as she goes, in the hope of that people turn against Keir Starmer, is not good enough". "If we are to prove that more tax, more net zero, more migration under Labour is bad for the country, we have to stop offering a version of that ourselves," he added. Graphic    Lord Frost Load-Date: June 28, 2023  End of Document
