   Voters aren't stupid enough to fall for Labour's smoke and mirrors on Brexit The Daily Telegraph (London) July 8, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 23 Length: 383 words Body   He might disguise it better than the Liberal Democrats, but I have little doubt that Sir Keir Starmer would rejoin the EU in a heartbeat if it wasn't for those pesky people known as voters. As shadow Brexit secretary, the Labour leader was one of the most vocal cheerleaders for a second referendum, taking every available opportunity to frustrate Brexit in the House of Commons. Despite Starmer insisting that "Britain's future is outside the EU" and ruling out rejoining the single market or the customs union, the electorate clearly don't think a leopard can change its spots. Four in 10 voters (41 per cent) believe that it is Labour policy to rejoin the bloc, according to a new poll by Redfield & Wilton Strategies. Meanwhile, 20 per cent said the party had no clear policy on Brexit and 23 per cent said they did not know what the party's policy was. Just 16 per cent of respondents correctly identified that the Labour Party's policy was to stay out of the European Union. These figures pose a problem for Sir Keir as Labour prepares to take back the Red Wall. Leave voters are rightly suspicious of a party whose wannabe foreign secretary David Lammy speaks of Switzerland-style "deals" with Brussels. "When I say that it is our number one priority to fix our relationship with the European Union, I think the British people support that," Lammy said in June. "I think people in the UK recognise because they're feeling it in their pocket, that we do need to have a total shift and a reset within our relationships." Really? I'm not so sure. In part because there seems to have been a "total shift and reset" in the thinking of key Eurocrats. Hot off the heels of former EU negotiator Michel Barnier calling for "a referendum on the question of immigration" in France, this week Donald Tusk, the former president of the European Council and a particular Remainer favourite, called for Poland to "regain control of its borders", saying that the government has allowed too much immigration from Islamic countries. These don't strike me as the sort of views that would "align" with a Left-leaning electorate. Labour perhaps needs to take back control of its Brexit policy. Despite Starmer insisting that 'Britain's future is outside the EU' the electorate clearly don't think a leopard can change its spots Load-Date: July 8, 2023  End of Document
