   We can do better than skint and scunnered Daily Record and Sunday Mail September 4, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: SPORT; Pg. 17 Length: 539 words Byline: TEPHEN FLYNN Body   SKINT, scunnered and Scottish? Blame the Tories. Their pompous private school Etonian elite have snaked their way into many of the top jobs in politics yet they have no idea what it's like to work your hardest only to find that it's still not enough. The bairns need new shoes, bread and beans are up in price again, electric is through the roof and that lot are telling you to "hold your nerve". Aye right. And don't forget, that's their message to you after 13 years of rule from Westminster. First, they gave us Cameron. He crippled folk on social security, starved the public sector of cash then caved to his own rightwing fantasists and served up Brexit. Then in danced May. Infamous for telling folk to "go home", she quickly lost the trust of her own mob in the Commons over Brexit and was kicked out her temporary home. Her biggest failing, though, that was probably what came next. Johnson. Not a care in the world, well aside from the lining of the gold wallpaper. Millions left without a penny of support during Covid, a Brexit deal that has left us all poorer, and so many lies that he couldn't even tell the truth about lying. The greatest lies of all though, those belong to the voices convincing Liz Truss she had what it takes to be prime minister. An economy smashed. The stupidity of Brexit on steroids. An arrogance only Westminster can create. And while she lives with publicly paid security for life, the public is left with financial insecurity. After less than 50 days, even the Tories couldn't stomach her any more, so they placed a call to California and in flew Rishi Sunak to tell us just to suck it up and ride it out. It'll be tough, the billionaire tells us, but it's a sacrifice he's willing to make. But it's not really getting any easier, is it? We know in energy-rich Scotland gas and electric bills will burn a hole through pay slips this winter. And in Brexit Britain, the cost of supermarket staples continues to leave a sour taste in the mouth. And we know that no matter how high mortgages are hiked the "might" of the UK Treasury won't be coming to rescue you. And what makes it all so much worse is the fact that Scotland didn't vote for one of those prime ministers. Not even close. We always do our bit but on Westminster's watch it's not Scotland that matters and that's never going to change. And sooner or later, the Tories will win again in England and then return to reign over us. Surely, it's not too much to ask that the people of Scotland always get a government that we actually vote for. So, the General Election can't just be about beating the Tories because Scotland will do that, and we'll do it better than ever. It must be about something much bigger - making sure that we never have to live under the rule of an unelected Tory Government ever again. And, the priorities of those standing to represent you in Westminster next year must be clear. They must put the costof-living crisis front and centre of their work, they must oppose - not meekly accept - the damage being caused by Brexit and they must fight to give the people of Scotland the right to decide their own future. That's what real change, and real hope, looks like. Skint, scunnered and Scottish? It's time to do something about it. Load-Date: September 4, 2023  End of Document
