   We should focus on making Brexit work; TALKBACK Get in touch: Email letters@birminghammail.co.uk Birmingham Evening Mail June 1, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Midland Independent Newspapers plc All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 610 words Body   JULIE Willetts commends the electorate for its bravery (Talkback, May 23), presumably for voting Leave in the 2016 referendum. However, she is the brave one, for stepping simultaneously into the tangled thicket that is Brexit and the hall of mirrors which is the constitutional position of Northern Ireland. First of all, we clearly have achieved Brexit. The vote in 2016 was to leave the EU or to stay in it. We voted narrowly to leave. The legislation was passed and we left. Job done. Nobody asked us to choose how we wanted to leave or what Leave looked like. Several prominent Brexiters said before the vote that we would be staying in the Single Market and seemed happy that we would be leaving only the EU institutions. In December 2019, Boris Johnson won enough votes (although not a majority) for his "oven-ready" deal, including the Northern Ireland Protocol, which he negotiated personally. The Withdrawal Agreement was passed. Mission accomplished. This is the only form of Brexit that has had any voter endorsement. Any other form of Brexit exists only in people's minds and not everyone is of the same mind. The EU may have outmanoeuvred us in the negotiations. This could be because they are malign Machiavellian characters with dark superpowers but there are two simpler explanations. First, the EU economy is about five times the size of that of the UK. The first rule of the playground is that big children can push around smaller ones. Smaller children need to work out how to outsmart the bigger ones. We never did. Secondly, we had no idea what we wanted to achieve from the negotiations and no plan to achieve it. The EU had both. Anybody who's been engaged in a commercial negotiation will recognise that that's not a good place to be. Julie Willetts is probably correct that our politicians are not up to the job. That's mainly because Boris Johnson got rid of almost all of the competent ones from his party. As regards Northern Ireland, the UK was warned by many people that leaving the EU would have major implications for the peace process. Since 1972, the drift of British government policy, often reluctantly, has been towards dismantling the Unionist state that was constructed from the 1920s. This involved recognising that people in Northern Ireland have complex identities. One of these (since 1973) is a European identity and one of the hopes which lay behind the Good Friday Agreement was that a common European identity could bring people together rather than push them apart. Brexit has put a stop to that. The toothpaste can't be put back into the tube, though. According to opinion polls, a majority of people in Northern Ireland are happy to remain in the Single Market. The Acts of Union are irrelevant in this. As both the High Court of Northern Ireland and the UK Supreme Court have pointed out, the Acts of Union are Acts of Parliament like any other. They don't have any privileged status over other legislation. Subsequent parliaments can amend or repeal them, and this has what they've done. The EU Withdrawal Act effectively repealed Article VI (freedom of trade). The Government of Ireland Act 1920 (which established Northern Ireland) and the Irish Free State (Agreement) Act 1922 had done the same to Article I (permanent union of the two kingdoms) and arguably Article III (a single parliament). The EU also made it clear from the outset that the Withdrawal Agreement would include special provisions for Northern Ireland. The obvious conclusion is that we have our Brexit and should direct our efforts to making it work rather than indulge in doomed projects to overturn it, whether from the left or the right. Gerry McMulllan Load-Date: June 1, 2023  End of Document
