   We're still fighting to secure a Real Brexit; TALK BACK Birmingham Evening Mail June 17, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Midland Independent Newspapers plc All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 18 Length: 450 words Body   GERRY McMullen claims not to appreciate the difference between the EU institutions and the implementation of its regulations (June 9). I would refer him to Julie Willetts' excellent letter of May 23 which illustrated this difference most conclusively. I would also point out that we are still subject to the rulings of the European Court of Justice (ECJ) whose role is to interpret EU laws including any disputes between Britain and the EU Commission. In effect they are judges in their own case. Any disputes between Britain and the EU should go to arbitration by a third independent party in order to remove any real or potential bias in favour of the Commission. However, the Commission has said that any agreements between Britain and the EU must be subject to the ECJ. We will not achieve a 'Real Brexit' until we have freed ourselves from the jurisdiction of the ECJ and agreed with the EU a mutually acceptable third party to settle any disputes over the interpretation of our agreements. The Government is yet to revise UK trading laws on goods and products which are not exported to the EU. Obviously any goods exported to the EU must meet EU standards in the same way that goods exported to, say, Canada must meet Canadian standards. We should be free to set our own standards for goods and services which are made and sold within the UK and this the Government has failed to do. According to the Office for Budget Responsibility Britain exports some 30% of its GDP with the remainder being consumed within the UK. A 'Real Brexit' will only come about when we elect a British Government that is prepared to put the interests of the British people first and amend or repeal those EU laws on our statute books that are deemed to be unnecessary or detrimental to our economy. It is also noticeable that the EU is still claiming fishing rights of up to six miles of our coastline and yet when it comes to illegal migrants once they have put their boats into the water it is deemed that they are in British waters and the French coastguards escort them across the channel. A 'Real Brexit' will be achieved when we can control our own borders and allow in only those who are doing so legally, however that is determined. Our current Government is not taking advantage of our ability to set and implement our own standards and laws and it is in this respect that we are still bound by the laws and regulations set by the EU. While we are a long way from achieving a 'Real Brexit' we have the opportunity, provided there is the political will and courage, of creating a flexible, vibrant economy in which all levels of society can benefit. Whether we do so or not is now up to us. Alan Spencer, Kings Norton Load-Date: June 17, 2023  End of Document
