   Would a windy day have stopped Brexit? I doubt it i-news July 14, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 25 Length: 986 words Byline: Stuart Ritchie Body   Some of the best critiques of movies on YouTube are by the channel Red Letter Media, which first became famous about 15 years ago for its devastating reviews of the Star Wars prequel films. They have a catchphrase they use when pointing out little references and callbacks in the visuals of the movies: they say they're "so subtle you might not even have noticed… but your brain did". And that's a nice way of summing up quite a lot of social psychology research: although we all think we're in control of our behaviour and making our own decisions, the theory goes, there's a whole world of subliminal messages out there that subtly influence the way we act. Some of this research, which claims things like "seeing pictures of dollar bills makes you more selfish", has been published in top scientific journals. But it has now either been fully debunked, or is at least looked on with extreme suspicion. But the idea of subliminal influences on behaviour lives on. A study published earlier this year in the journal Political Behavior focuses on a different kind of subliminal influence: the wind. According to the study, the speed of the wind on polling day can have a big influence on the way people vote. They looked at the numbers from the 2014 Scottish independence referendum, the 2016 Brexit referendum, and 24 different referendums from Switzerland, where the government regularly puts policy issues to the popular vote. They found that in parts of the country where winds were higher on the relevant referendum day, people were less likely to vote for Scottish independence, less likely to vote Leave, and less likely to vote for increased immigration to Switzerland. Why? Their theory is the following: when it's windier you feel more unsafe; feeling unsafe unconsciously influences you to be more risk-averse; therefore, when it's windier you're less likely to vote for the "riskier" option. Even though the effect was small - a 1km per hour increase in wind speed translating into a 0.15 percentage point decrease in the Brexit vote, or a 0.79 percentage point decrease in the vote for Scottish independence - the authors say that a minor difference in the wind speed could have tipped the results in a few places where the numbers were very close. How plausible is this? Are people literally "floating" voters, their opinions buffeted this way and that by the weather as they make their way to the polling station? It doesn't seem too likely that people notice the wind speed on their way to vote - but then that's the point: people didn't notice... but their brains did. Decrease, points, in Scottish 'caused' increase The wind speed for the study was calculated as an average across the entire time the polls were open. But it's not as if people voted at random times across the day: the Scottish and Brexit referendums were both on Thursdays, and presumably a lot more people voted in the evening after work. Wouldn't it be more accurate to look at when most people voted, and check the wind speeds for those specific times? Even if we accept the setup, the results leave something to be desired. In the model for Scottish independence, after they controlled for some potential confounding factors (such as the general, historical wind speed in the area), the result would no longer be considered "statistically significant" at the level the majority of scientists use. That's not the case for the Brexit vote, where the results remained significant. But the political scientist Erik Gahner Larsen points out that the researchers might not have controlled for everything relevant: regions within the UK tend to have similar wind speeds (for instance, areas within London tended to have similar wind levels, for obvious reasons). After Larsen controlled for this regional variation, the results disappeared. Overall, the results - rather like the proposed influences on people's behaviour - seem very subtle, and it doesn't take many small changes to the analysis to render them non-statistically-significant. Results this fragile could certainly still be real: small effects exist! But we can't have too much confidence in their existence from this analysis. Alas, there also seem to be mistakes in the data. Data sleuth Nick Brown has written a detailed blog post where he points out some very weird numbers in the Swiss part of the data. For example, they include in their models a measure of humidity, which is represented by a number between 0 and 1, translating into the percentage of humidity. But in a few cases, the number is over 1,000. It's not clear what to do with these impossible numbers, which are almost certainly a typo or copy/paste error. As with Larsen's re-analysis, when Brown re-ran the numbers after removing the broken data points, the results for the main rainfall-voting correlations looked much less impressive. percentage the vote for independence by a 1kph in wind So, does wind speed influence voting decisions? I don't know - but I think probably not. The analyses in this new study just don't provide compelling evidence - and certainly don't go far enough to overcome my innate scepticism that the wind could affect a big decision like someone's referendum vote. It is, however, a nice example of how, even after a study is published in a peer-reviewed journal, additional analysis after the fact can shed new light on its results. In an ideal world, every scientific paper would get a re-analysis like Brown's and Larsen's. Maybe the peer-reviewers didn't notice the mistakes... but the scientific community did. Subscribe now to his exclusive newsletter SCIENCE fictions Good writing about bad science, from our expert correspondent Stuart Ritchie inews.co.uk/sign-up The theory is that when it's windy you feel more unsafe and are less likely to vote for the 'risky' option 0.79 Decrease, in percentage points, in the vote Scottish independence 'caused' by a 1kph increase in wind speed Load-Date: July 13, 2023  End of Document
