   'Brexit is killing us,' claim British musicians as work dries up over EU red tape Irish Independent August 23, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 15 Length: 454 words Byline: ADAM FOREST Body   The devastating impact of Brexit on Britain's touring musicians has been revealed in a survey of the struggling sector, with some performers forced to quit the profession. Almost half of British musicians (47pc) say they have had less work in Europe since the country's exit from the bloc, while more than a quarter (28pc) have had no work in the EU at all. A report by the Independent Society of Musicians (ISM) warned that the red tape enforced by Boris Johnson's Brexit deal was still having "an enormously damaging" effect on British bands and singers. Major British music stars, from Damon Albarn to Elton John, have attacked the UK government for failing to bring down the barriers to touring. Blur frontman Albarn recently called Brexit a "tragedy". British mezzo soprano Jennifer Johnston said yesterday that Brexit was "quietly killing our world-class music sector" and blamed the Tory government's "unwillingness" to renegotiate visas and other touring bureaucracy with Brussels. The survey of 400 musicians for the ISM report found that 25pc have had EU work cancelled since Brexit because of problems with visas and work permits, extra travel costs and paperwork. One said: "Work has come to a halt. The offer of European gigs simply dried up. My band simply can't make any kind of living in the tiny UK market any more, so we basically have folded as a working band." Another British musician said they were applying for an Irish passport "just to try and get around all the red tape and issues not being in the EU has caused". Performers also pointed to the extra time and cost involved in travelling across borders with complex equipment. Under the Schengen visa waiver scheme, people in the music sector are limited to spending 90 days in a six-month period in the EU. The ISM has urged UK prime minister Rishi Sunak's ministers to negotiate a bespoke visa waiver agreement with Brussels, allowing British performers to work in any part of the bloc for up to 90 days in a period of 180 days. They also called on the government to work towards exemptions for musical instruments and equipment, as well as an exemption from "cabotage" rules governing the transport of goods between two places in the same country for the creative industries. "UK music is a great success story and we are rightly proud of it," said ISM chief executive Deborah Annetts. "The government has been asleep on the job - it could have tackled many of the issues facing the music sector by itself and made Brexit work. It chose not to. "Brexit should never have meant that musicians cannot share their talent freely with our closest neighbours. "We call on the government to take action and make Brexit work for the well-being of musicians and our economy." Graphic    Blur frontman Damon Albarn Load-Date: August 23, 2023  End of Document
