   'MPs don't care about the whip': Rwanda plan risks becoming Sunak's Brexit nightmare i-news December 9, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 1189 words Body   When Rishi Sunak took to the stage at 9 Downing Street this week for an emergency press conference on his emergency Rwanda legislation that prompted an emergency mini-reshuffle, warning lights began to flash for many in his party. The Prime Minister looked irascible, tetchy. His attempt to show that he was getting a grip on the issue of the small boats crisis - and that this time he really meant it - came across to several MPs as a leader losing control, rather than seizing it. "I was disappointed to see Sunak's demeanour," one senior right-wing Tory MP told i. "I think it does show that this situation is getting beyond his control… I'm not sure if there is anything he can do now that will satisfy all wings of the party, and that's a big problem." Senior Government sources put his irritable appearance on Thursday down to Mr Sunak being an "anti-politician", insisting that all he cares about is "getting stuff done". "That means he's not always aware of saying the right things in the way that some other politicians are," the source said. This is unlikely to calm nerves on Conservative benches. The press conference came after the Prime Minister published his long-anticipated emergency legislation to beef up his beleaguered Rwanda policy that will give the Government the power to deport asylum seekers. When the Safety of Rwanda Bill landed on Wednesday, it surprised many by how hardline it was, handing the executive the power to ignore the Human Rights Act and the Refugee Convention. But while it sails close to disapplying the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), stating that the courts "must not have regard" to interim measures by the European Court of Human Rights, it does not go as far as Tory MPs on the right wanted, which was a complete disapplication of the convention. No 10 insisted, however, that any attempt to pull out of the ECHR will collapse the deal signed with Rwanda, leaving the Government's flagship small boats policy in tatters. The stand-off has prompted fears that the increasingly intractable issue of the Rwanda policy has started to look like a mini re-enactment of the Brexit battles of 2018. Perhaps of greater concern is that Brexit "Spartans" who formed the hardcore of the European Research Group of Tory MPs are once again donning their helmets and spears to relive former glories. The infamous "Star Chamber", established by the ERG in 2019 and led by the arch-Brexiteer Sir William Cash to pore over Theresa May's Brexit deal line by line, will deliver its verdict on the Rwanda bill in the coming days, threatening more trouble for No 10. While one senior backbencher insisted that no one on the right would oppose the bill when it appears for its second reading on Tuesday, they warned that Mr Sunak faced an onslaught of amendments as the legislation continues through the Commons. A new band of hardcore rebels is leading the charge. Formed partly from members of the ERG, the group - working under the name "gang of 30" - is poised to try to amend the proposed laws to make it even tougher. "The gang of 30 is using this legislation as a Trojan horse to leave the ECHR and to pick a fight and attack Rishi," the Tory said. The source said the amendment would be a "political marker", as many on the right believe "the genie is out of the bottle" on the ECHR. The MP added: "Parts of that gang are definitely trying to get rid of Rishi and bring in Kemi [Badenoch, inset] as well." The precarious situation has led many Conservatives to draw links between Mr Sunak's position with that of Theresa May's before she was ousted as leader. Having lost a series of Cabinet ministers over her Brexit deal, Mrs May's leadership looked increasingly untenable by late 2018 as it became clear that those in her party would not countenance a softer exit from the EU. Questions began to dog her over whether she maintained the confidence of her MPs, and this week Mr Sunak was also forced to bat away journalists' probing as to whether the Tory benches were united behind him. In a further worrying sign for No 10, the Conservative Party chairman, Richard Holden, was forced to warn colleagues this week that it would be "insanity" to hold another leadership contest before the next election. One Tory insider said there were "parallels with Theresa May" and Mr Sunak's own leadership, which they warned was in danger of suffering death by a thousand cuts. "Downing Street [is] spending their time gazing across to Parliament waiting for MPs to tell them what they are going to amend," they said. They highlighted a series of potential legislative flashpoints looming for the Prime Minister including the Criminal Justice Bill and the Sentencing Bill. A scrap is also expected over the proposed smoking ban. "[In the] long term they have serious problems," the insider said. "This week has been pretty chaotic, there are a lot of unhappy bunnies out there. It makes it look like Downing Street is not running things. They look like they are being tossed around by events rather than shaping them. They are staggering on, it's week to week." Such is the underlying febrility among Conservatives in Westminster that some insiders are predicting an earlier election next year as the strands holding the party together look set to break. "I don't think they can possibly go beyond spring [for an election]... they can't hold this together that long," one Tory source said, before pointing to the surprise Commons defeat suffered by Mr Sunak on compensation for victims of the infected blood scandal. "They have had their first defeat, on infected blood, there will be more of that," the source said. "What the blood vote demonstrated is MPs don't really care about the whip that much - you can't do that for a year." Mr Sunak's cause was heavily undermined by the shock resignation of his closest political ally and friend Robert Jenrick, who dismissed the bill as being "a triumph of hope over experience". But Government sources were quick to link Mr Jenrick's decision to quit as being one of "frustrated ambition" after he was overlooked for the Home Secretary job in last month's reshuffle. A No 10 source said: "I don't think Robert has been happy since the last reshuffle, to be honest." This was echoed by a senior minister who insisted that the decision was "basically personal". "He isn't where he wanted to be and that's at the core of what he did," the Tory added. Others within the party have deep misgivings about Mr Sunak's handling of the reshuffle, in which many MPs hoping to be given one last ministerial gig before the election were overlooked. "There are people who have been loyal and kept quiet and done what they want you to do - defending him - but get missed," one backbencher said. "They made a lot of promises to people and didn't deliver on it. And I think the big thing is that you can see time running out so you now just think, what's the point? "I'm pissed off, I'm angry… but there are some very, very angry people right now." Reporting by Richard Vaughan, Arj Singh, Hugo Gye and Eleanor Langford I'm pissed off, I'm angry… but there are some very, very angry people right now Load-Date: December 9, 2023  End of Document
