   'Not for EU' labels causing confusion among some British shoppers Belfast Telegraph January 12, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 530 words Byline: Tamara Davison Body   SHOPPERS have been left baffled by "Not for EU" stickers on goods in Great Britain, with many believing the products are of a lower standard thanks to Brexit. Since last October, meat and dairy products from Great Britain that are sold in Northern Ireland have been required to carry the labels as a result of the Windsor Framework agreed by the UK and the EU. The scheme will be rolled out across the UK this coming October, but some stores in GB have been using them already - leaving many shoppers confused. The post-Brexit wording is designed to stop food products from GB that are sent to Northern Ireland ending up in European Union countries, such as the Republic of Ireland. However, the labelling has left some shoppers questioning whether UK food items are of a lower standard than their EU counterparts. One shopper wrote: "My milk now says 'not for EU' on it - can you confirm that this is just because of U.K. red tape and that it still complies with EU safety standards? I'd hate to think it's 'special' Brexit milk that's not safe for Europeans." "Let's be honest about this, the 'Not For EU' label on foods shows that Britain is the dirty man of Europe thanks to #Brexit. Your only upshot is a pint of wine!" joked one social media profile. "They've spent decades complaining about the EU being over fussy on high food standards - now they label food in UK supermarkets as 'not for EU consumption'," added another. It's all connected to the red tape that has emerged due to Brexit and the Northern Ireland protocol. Due to differing food regulations between Great Britain and the EU, authorities had to think of a way of ensuring the passage of goods from GB to NI, but keeping them out of shops in the Irish Republic. The result was the Windsor Framework, which established a 'green lane' that could reduce red tape on products crossing the Irish Sea. This led to the agreement for "Not for EU" labelling. Social media has since been alight with people questioning whether these food products are of a lower standard or fail to meet EU regulations. In reality, products with the "Not for EU" logo simply mean they're meant to remain in the UK market, and it doesn't relate to standards at all. However, some shoppers are still a little uncertain. Someone wrote: "This all shows the wisdom of EU to insist on the 'not for EU' label. It safeguards EU producers against GB competitors that can produce cheaper because of lower environmental and labour standards." The labelling was introduced to meat and some dairy products in Northern Ireland in August 2023. However, it will be rolled out across the rest of the UK later this year. Christopher Elliott of the Institute for Global Food Security at Queen's University Belfast told Politico: "Many consumers find food labels confusing enough without yet another additional layer of red tape. "Like many warned and the government denied, the implementation of so many aspects of Brexit has brought about additional regulatory burdens and costs for industry and ultimately increased costs and reduced choice for consumers. "The outworking of the Windsor Framework is another example where it's lose-lose for all." © Evening Standard Load-Date: January 12, 2024  End of Document
