   'People can't believe what we were forced to do because of Brexit -it's ridiculous' manchestereveningnews.co.uk November 25, 2023 Saturday 4:44 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: GREATER MANCHESTER NEWS; Version:1 Length: 859 words Byline: By, Paige Oldfield Highlight: Mark Rofe went to extreme lengths to be with his girlfriend Alex Limanowka in Barcelona Body   A love-struck man who was so desperate to live with his girlfriend he 'married' her to get around post-Brexit immigration laws has described the situation they found themselves in as "ridiculous". Mark Rofe met his Polish partner Alex Limanowka in Barcelona in 2019. The pair, both 34, instantly hit it off and decided to start dating when he returned to the holiday hotspot two years later. As their relationship blossomed, freelance marketer Mark wanted to visit Alex at her home in the Spanish city as much as he could.  But due to new Brexit laws, Mark, who once went viral for advertising himself on a Manchester billboard, quickly realised that wouldn't be as easy as he first thought.  He managed to see Alex for around half of the year thanks to the 90/180 rule, which sees British visitors to any country within the Schengen area unable to stay longer than 90 days within a 180-day period. The Schengen area covers most countries in the EU.  Mark made sure to stick to the limit and returned to the UK when his allowance ran out - but understandably wanted to see his girlfriend more often.  "It was just a case of managing those days and making sure I kept under the limit," he told the Manchester Evening News. "But the more time I spent in Spain, the more of a problem it started to become.  "It essentially meant that I could only see Alex for half the year, and who wants to only see their partner for half the year"  Mark, who now lives in Surrey, knew he had to come up with a permanent solution. He considered several options in order to obtain a visa, including becoming a student and even retiring.  But none of those choices were suitable and running out of ideas, Mark realised the couple had found themselves in an impossible situation.  Completely out of options, the pair finally decided to do a pareja de hecho, a type of civil partnership which is similar to getting married.  The unification, which first came into force in 1998, has close characteristics to that of a traditional marriage. But the union also has its own distinctive features, including being able to dissolve it without judicial intervention. Those within a pareja de hecho have the right to a widow's pension, alimony, adoption, the right to continue renting a dwelling after their partner's death and inheritance.  It provides those rights in recognition of a 'domestic partnership' between people who are not legally married. The couple carried out their ceremony in February 2022, meaning Mark was finally able to move to Barcelona to be with Alex.  "It wasn't exactly something quick or cheap to do either," Mark added. "It cost thousands in legal fees and took more than six months for me to get my residency.  "I think it's fair to say that if Brexit hadn't have happened, we wouldn't have done it, as there would have been no reason to do so.  "However, we did it because we wanted to maintain and grow our relationship and because neither of us wanted to do long distance.  "We don't really think about it too much and just carry on as normal, we just treat it as a piece of paper that allows us to be together.  "However, if we wanted to get properly married, I have no idea how that would work now, whether we have to cancel our civil partnership first, or if we can 'upgrade' it."  Mark's partner Alex says while the stressful situation put a strain on their relationship, she's thankful the pair found a way to make their love work.  "For a while, things were uncertain, which put a strain on our relationship," she said.  "Thankfully for us though, we managed to find a way to make it work. Putting our situation aside, it does make me think how many other hundreds or thousands of other couples may have found themselves in a similar situation because of Brexit. It seems a bit sad that for Brits, even love has more boundaries than it did before." Mark now describes the hoops they jumped through as "really frustrating" and "ridiculous". "When I tell people, they can't believe that's what I had to do," he added.  "I don't think they realise just how complicated and difficult it is for Brits to move to Spain or other EU countries now.  "On a personal level, it was really frustrating, and ridiculous that that's what we had to do to make things work, but I feel thankful and lucky that we were able to make things work.  "I think it's a shame that since leaving the EU even love has boundaries now and demonstrates just how inferior the rights of Brits are now compared to before."  Earlier this year, Spain introduced a digital nomad visa, which offers an opportunity for those who are able to work remotely, to live and work in Spain.  Mark has recently launched VisasForBrits.com, which helps Brits to obtain the nomad visa so they can move to Spain.  "Having been through the visa process myself, I have first-hand experience of just how complicated and expensive it can be," he added. I've created VisasForBrits.com because I wanted to make it easier, more accessible, and affordable for Brits to come and work and live in Spain.  "It's still nowhere near as easy as it would have been before Brexit, but it's at least an option for those who may fit the criteria."  Load-Date: November 25, 2023  End of Document
