   'The Speaker scuppered the Brexit deal' The Times (London) August 28, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: T2;FEATURES; Pg. 6 Length: 863 words Body   play ball with these motions, the Speaker threatened to hold ministers in contempt of Parliament. This use of the Humble Address was not just an affront to parliamentary procedure, it also involved Her Majesty in ongoing political debates in a way which rode roughshod over the accepted lines between the role of the elected House and the constitutional monarch. In my view, this was completely unacceptable. Regrettably, it is a mechanism that has come to be an accepted part of the Opposition's armoury. Arguably, this set a precedent which was later reflected in the decision by Boris Johnson's government to prorogue Parliament in August 2019, a move which required the monarch's acceptance. That prorogation, designed to stop all parliamentary business, was of course later found to be unlawful by the Supreme Court. This was not the first time Brexiteers had suggested prorogation. As noted earlier, apart from a limited number of items, such as business determined by the Backbench Business Committee, business of the House of Commons each day is decided by the government. Following the 2017 election, although the Conservatives had more MPs than any other party, I did not have an overall majority. I was able to form a government because of an agreement with the members of the Democratic Unionist Party in Parliament. This meant that obtaining a majority in the Commons on any vote was difficult. These difficult numbers emboldened Remainers who wanted to bring forward motions and indeed legislation that would enable them to require the government to take a particular position in the Brexit negotiations. They were desperately keen to use Parliament to stop a no-deal Brexit. This was, of course, opposed by the Brexiteers, and so earlier in 2019, Jacob Rees-Mogg, a leading Brexiteer, suggested to me that the way through this was to ask Her Majesty to prorogue Parliament, thus removing the opportunity for such business to be brought forward. I refused. It was also suggested to me by the same source that, if the Remainers did pass a bill that the Brexiteers didn't like, I should ask Her Majesty not to give it Royal Assent. Again, I refused. I resisted both of these proposals, not just because of the implications for the role of Parliament, but mainly because of my firm belief that it would have been unthinkable to bring the monarch into these matters. By sanctioning the idea of prorogation, the hard-line Brexiteers were taking a sledgehammer to the British constitution. Perhaps what I find most shocking about John Bercow's approach is that the Speaker's role is to uphold democracy. Yet here was a Speaker who, it seemed to me, was deliberately using his power in a way that favoured those who wanted to try to overturn the democratic will of the people. There is no doubt that for many people, any faith they had in Parliament was being shattered by the attempts by MPs to overturn the result of the referendum. Throughout the Brexit debate, there were too many parliamentarians, holding their positions through the democratic will of the people, who worked tirelessly to try to overturn the will of the people, and I believe that John Bercow was key among them. Let down by Labour Her Majesty's Official Opposition had the power, because of the numbers in the Commons, to deliver Brexit by supporting the government's position or even by abstaining on key votes. They chose to abuse their power by putting party politics first and the interests of the country second. At every stage, they chose to frustrate Brexit and, as a result, they paid the price at the ballot box. There were some Labour MPs who spoke up to support Brexit, but they too paid the price at the election. One of the most vocal was Caroline Flint, who consistently and bravely challenged her front bench and at times voted with the government. But arguing that the result of the referendum should be respected didn't prevent her from being caught up in the move by Leavesupporting Labour voters to insist on Brexit through the ballot box, and she was carried away by the tide that swept out so many Labour MPs. There was an opportunity for Labour to work with the government and show the country that politicians could put aside their party-political labels for the greater good. For decades, Jeremy Corbyn had argued against EU imperialism, and Labour had promised in the 2017 general election to respect the outcome of the referendum. But in the end, Labour were caught between Jeremy Corbyn, who couldn't bear to do a deal with the Conservatives, and Keir Starmer, who was playing to those in the Labour Party who wanted a second referendum. I leave it to the reader to decide whether the latter took that stance purely through conviction or with an eye on his own leadership ambitions. When push came to shove, I was willing to compromise in order to deliver Brexit. Jeremy Corbyn and the Labour Party were not. Theresa May will be in conversation with Richard Coles at Queen Elizabeth Hall, Southbank Centre, London SE1, on September 14. There is a limited allocation of tickets for Times+ members. To enter the ballot for a chance to attend in person, visit www.mytimesplus.co.uk/events Graphic    AUSTIN HARGRAVE FOR THE SUNDAY TIMESAbove, from left: May as a candidate for North West Durham in 1992; in 2016 Load-Date: August 28, 2023  End of Document
