   'We just stopped growing': firms hit by post-Brexit rules i-news August 4, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 15 Length: 659 words Byline: Molly Blackall Body   The day after the UK voted to leave the EU, Sarah McCartney's largest ever sale was cancelled. It was a sign of things to come. The owner of an artisan perfume brand, 4160 Tuesdays, Ms McCartney had experienced steady growth in the years before the Brexit referendum. But the 2016 vote marked the start of seven years of red tape which she said has cut her profit margins down to zero. The businesswoman said that when the pound plunged immediately after the referendum, customers who had also committed to buying from European companies were forced to cancel their UK orders because of spiralling costs: "A £6,000 order, the biggest we'd ever had at the time, gone." Ms McCartney (inset), who voted Remain, added: "Today, we're still in business, but we went from making 10 per cent net margin a year to zero. What happened was, in 2016 we just stopped growing." New trade rules introduced after Britain officially left the EU in January 2020 have added new requirements for British firms trading with European countries. This red tape has left business owners "banging their heads against a brick wall", according to the British Chambers of Commerce, with the pandemic and cost of living crisis only exacerbating the strain, In Ms McCartney's case, she chose to suspend all exports to the European market - which had accounted for 15 per sent of sales - for two years instead of trying to take on the sudden mountain of paperwork and costs. New regulations for the cosmetic industry meant that her company needed a "responsible person" (RP) in the EU who would deal with complaints and issues on European sales. Previously, they had been able to be their own RP. Ms McCartney said she was quoted £1,000 per product for this, which would have added costs of £100,000 a year. She was also facing £150 cosmetic product safety reports for each product. "It's a big sum for a tiny business," she said. Ms McCartney also experienced issues with delivery, as post-Brexit changes to VAT distribution made it difficult and costly to ship products valued under £150. Ms McCartney recently resumed EU sales after ironing out delivery issues. She has also found a perfumer in France who acts as her RP for a lower cost. But she has been forced to put up prices. A survey taken nearly one year after Brexit came into force found that more than one in 10 small and medium-sized exporters have lost trade with the EU since Brexit. Some have decided to turn away from European markets altogether. "To me it was blinking obvious that was going to be worse," Ms McCartney said. Julianne Ponan, founder and chief executive of health food company Creative Nature, said that she has pivoted her business away from the European market as a result of post-Brexit changes. The company lost out on a "huge" business opportunity - with Boots Ireland - because of uncertainty around post-Brexit trade, and has had to tackle new packaging and shipping requirements. "It means extra documentation: £50 here and £100 there. It all adds up when you're talking about one single order," Ms Ponan said. She said she had voted for Brexit in the hope of accessing new global markets, and "did not expect to have as many problems". She is now undecided about whether she would vote the same way again. But like Ms McCartney, Ms Ponan said that some of the post-Brexit teething problems are now beginning to ease, and the UK-EU trade relationship is "getting easier to navigate". The UK has signed trade deals and agreements in principle with 71 countries since formally withdrawing from the EU, although most were rollover deals replicating previous agreements. "It has opened up some amazing opportunities as well in terms of free trade agreements, and things are coming down the line," Ms Ponan said. "So I think there are pros and cons, I just wish it hadn't taken as long and had as much uncertainty as there's been." It means extra documentation: £50 here and £100 there. It all adds up on a single order Load-Date: August 4, 2023  End of Document
