   'Wetherspoon's boss does not deserve his knighthood' i-news January 5, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 36 Length: 862 words Byline: Josh Barrie Body   There is no question that the J D Wetherspoon founder Sir Tim Martin, who started with a single pub in north London and now runs a chain of almost 900, is a savvy businessman. Spoons, as it is commonly known, has a market value close to £1bn. Its 42,000 bartenders pour around 50 million pints every year. A force to be reckoned with, then, and a successful business, and to that end perhaps Martin is deserving of a knighthood. But there are many publicans and restaurateurs who would argue differently. To them, Sir Tim's New Year honour stings. It might be the timing, because vast swathes of the hospitality trade are feeling the pinch, with the aftershocks of Brexit and Covid continuing to have a negative impact. Matt Fallaize, of the Kicking Donkey in Ormskirk, Lancashire, says: "Spoons does what it does. I can't say it's my cup of tea. And it does seem a bit rich that someone whose vocal support for Brexit has done so much to make trading and staffing conditions worse is being given a gong. Is it for services to pre-poached eggs?" Already this year - not yet a week old - hospitality closures abound, from London to Yorkshire to Manchester, and everywhere in between. Most at risk are family-run, independent businesses, those that do not enjoy the Government's ear, nor the marketing budgets, buying power, and safety net-as-capital as the likes of Spoons. One such closure is Copper & Ink, an intimate restaurant in Blackheath, south-east London, run by the MasterChef finalist Tony Rodd and his wife, Becky. The decision to shut their business, they said, was "heartbreaking". But it was inevitable: soaring energy costs, rising food prices, and a fall in customer demand have proven to be insurmountable. "Oh yes, congratulations to Tim Martin though… f**k sake," Rodd tweeted. Another restaurant, Greens in Didsbury, Manchester, has closed after 33 years. Not even the celebrity of its founder, the Sunday Brunch presenter Simon Rimmer, was enough to save it. And chef James Allock had to call time on the Pig & Whistle in Beverley, East Yorkshire, "in its current form" this week because of mounting pressures, the ongoing staffing crisis among them. "To say it's been hard has been an understatement," he said. Figures from the commercial real estate analyst Altus Group, released in September, found that almost 400 pubs closed in the first half of 2023, compared with 386 over the whole of 2022. Many blame business rates, rising rents, 20 per cent VAT and the cost of living crisis hurting footfall. There is a common sentiment among some in the industry that Wetherspoon has contributed to the demise of the independents, which cannot compete with its rockbottom prices, achieved by buying in bulk and selling products at high volume, and quickly. "I think it's laughable, the man lords it up as the voice of the pub trade while so many independents and family-owned businesses have vanished over the years," says Tom McNeeney, who runs The Oxford, a pub in Rochdale. "It's sad. Over the past 15 years or so we have seen the businessman take over the trade of a traditional landlady or landlord. Tim Martin is the poster boy. What the businessman makes in that exchange we all pay the price for. "And [the knighthood] is once again a sign of the current Government being totally deaf to the hospitality trade. Don't get me started on the fact he's a Tory donor. It feels a lot like a government that knows it won't survive another election [and so is] making sure that its mates get their promised moment in the sun." Sir Tim was among the most vocal supporters of Brexit and was granted a platform on television shows from Question Time to Politics Live. He was snapped having a pint of real ale with Boris Johnson, donated £200,000 to the Vote Leave campaign, and even published a magazine featuring pro-Brexit articles. It was distributed throughout his pubs. Ask almost anyone in the industry and they will tell you that leaving Europe has not been kind to pubs, bars, hotels and restaurants. Piers Baker, who owns three pubs in Essex, says: "He [Martin] employs thousands of people, buys gallons of beer - much from the UK - and contributes to society. "But I think his campaigning for Brexit has weakened hospitality and so I don't think a knighthood is merited. Brexit has hurt us and it has made Europeans working in hospitality feel unwelcome." However, Sir Tim is not without admirers, or sympathisers, at least. Mark Young, who opened Sela Bar in Leeds in 2004, says he was surprised that such an accolade for the Wetherspoon founder took this long. He says: "The Wetherspoon business model is a simple one and definitely has its place in the hospitality landscape. "To have built a business that has lasted for the best part of half a century is truly commendable. Wetherspoons has adapted to changes in the industry and customer patterns in ways that some other operators have not." The man who brought us the burger and a pint deal and Curry Club is a knight of the realm. But there may not be many publicans raising a pitcher of Cheeky Vimto to Sir Tim Martin. Tim Martin is the poster boy. What the businessman makes in that exchange we all pay the price for Load-Date: January 5, 2024  End of Document
