   "If I try to come back, it will be even worse": Spanish woman's expulsion from UK after returning from Christmas opens the thunder box CE Noticias Financieras English January 9, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1262 words Body    A 34-year-old Spanish woman has been expelled from the United Kingdom, the country where she resides, when she tried to return after the Christmas vacations. Maria (not her real name) presented the border police with papers proving she had the right to live and work on British soil after Brexit. But she was told she was "wasting her time" and after spending a night in detention at Luton airport, she was put on a plane back to Spain.  The episode occurred last December 26, but it is only now that it has been published by The Guardian. However, this is not an isolated case. Since the UK left the EU, El Confidencial has heard of other Spaniards who have been denied entry into the country.  It was on December 31, 2020 when the transition period came to an end and the new regulations imposed by the historic divorce came into force. However, many of the requests from EU residents to regulate their situation have not yet been processed, generating a multitude of problems such as the ones Maria is going through now.  The Spaniard lives with her husband and in-laws in Bedfordshire (East England). When her sister gave birth last month, she traveled to Spain for four days to meet her niece . But when she landed back at Luton Airport (London) on December 26, she was taken to a room, stripped of her belongings - including her phone - and left there overnight. The next day, she was put on a plane back to Spain and warned not to try to enter the UK for a month.  "I was  supposed to go back to work, but now my life has gone down the drain. All my things are in the UK: my dog, my car. I was studying for veterinary nursing, which was my dream. But if I try to go back, it will be even worse," she told The Guardian.  Maria had filed a late application in 2023 to regulate her status. She was rejected in June for failing to provide sufficient evidence, but she asked for a review and had a certificate from the Home Office assuring her that she "could work in the UK" until she received a response. "I could have told them I was a tourist [allowed to stay for up to six months], but I'm not and I have nothing to hide and I told them that. I'm waiting for the appeal decision and that's why I'm still working," she said.  The border official - who coincidentally had also stopped her in August, but let her through the checks after consulting with her partner - told her that the paperwork was invalid, contradicting information detailed in Home Office documents.  Maria lived in the UK from 2014 to 2018. She had recently returned after a period in South Africa, where her husband was completing his PhD. Covid confinements had prevented bringing forward the return. Under the rules, she was allowed to make a late application to regulate her status, but must prove that her departure from the UK was not so long as to invalidate her rights, as set out in the withdrawal agreement sealed between London and Brussels.  The organization The 3 Million - which watches over the rights of EU citizens after Brexit - already warned at the time that many were going to be left "as illegal immigrants, without even knowing it," with all the repercussions that this implies.  "Unfortunately, Maria's case is not isolated. The number of EU citizens refused at the border has quadrupled in recent years and accounts for around 60% of all refusals. Also, more than 140,000 people are still waiting for delayed responses from the Ministry of Interior to their application to regulate their status at risk of being denied entry to the country when they travel," Andreea Dumitrache, spokesperson for The 3 Million, assures this newspaper. "This is a disproportionate implementation of the rules. It is a hostile system to which we show our concern."  Border police refused Maria entry on the grounds that her "EUSS [EU settlement scheme] application has been rejected and she no longer has the right of admission to the UK." However, Maria, who is now taking legal advice, rejects this version of events, arguing that her application certificate makes clear her right to work in the UK while her case is still under review.  Alistair Strathern, Labour MP for Mid Bedfordshire - the constituency where the Spaniard lives - says he is seeking answers from the Home Office on the case. "It's really important for our borders to be secure and for people to have confidence in border officials who are empowered to act within the law. But it seems that in this case that doesn't seem to have happened and there is a loophole," he says.  The Home Office defends that the problem for those with an application to regulate their situation - through settled status -who try to enter the country is not their right to work, but to show evidence that they have a right to be in the country under the Brexit withdrawal agreement. Mind you, they specify that those who are refused entry "is not the same as being subject to a deportation order which, although valid, would prevent re-entry to the UK." "Border Force's number one priority is to keep our borders secure and we will never compromise on this," a Home Office spokesperson stresses.  "Officers can detain anyarriving passengerfor further screening if they are not immediately satisfied that they qualify for entry. This decision is made based on the information provided by the passenger, not their nationality," they qualify.  EU nationals who could prove they were residing in the UK before December 31, 2020 had a grace period until June 30, 2021 to legalize their residency after Brexit and maintain, among others, access to public healthcare. They had to do so for all, without exception. Those married to British and also non-EU spouses of Europeans. Because otherwise, to give an example, the American married to a Spanish woman would also be in an illegal situation. After all, his or her right of residence was bound by EU regulations.  Those who had been here for five years or more had to apply for a settlement scheme. However, every time they change their address, renew their passport or have any change in their personal data, they must notify the authorities. And if they are out of the country for five years, they basically disappear from the system.  They are no longer eligible for settlement status. And let's put all this in the context of the global pandemic. How many EU citizens went home for long periods of time to their home countries to take advantage of teleworking? How many university students were sent home to take online classes?  Far from regaining control of the borders, the great promise of Brexit, net migration - the difference between those arriving and those leaving - set a new record in 2022, with 745,000, higher than previously estimated, according to the latest official figures from the Office for National Statistics.  In the run-up to the general elections scheduled for 2024, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has further tightened measures for both legal immigrants (caregivers, for example, will not be able to bring their partners and children) and illegal immigrants (those he wants to send to Rwanda with a controversial program branded illegal by the judiciary).  A 34-year-old Spanish woman has been expelled from the United Kingdom, the country where she lives, when she tried to return after the Christmas vacations. Maria (not her real name) presented the border police with papers proving she had the right to live and work on British soil after Brexit. But she was told she was "wasting her time" and after spending a night in detention at Luton airport, she was put on a plane back to Spain.  Load-Date: January 10, 2024  End of Document
