   "We're eating any crap": Brits shocked by 'non-EU friendly' products CE Noticias Financieras English January 30, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1210 words Body    When Tony Blair won a historic victory for Labour in 1997, there was euphoria in the school where a young boy named Rishi Sunak was studying. But for the 16-year-old, there was nothing to celebrate. That same evening he wrote an article for the school magazine The Wykehamist lamenting the news. His main complaint: Europe. Blair "revels in the label of a patriot, but has plans for the possible breakup of the UK and membership of an eventual European superstate." The current tenant of Downing Street has always been a Eurosceptic.  Pragmatic, but Eurosceptic.  Of course, what he did not count on was that the implementation of Brexit was going to take as long as a bad delivery, reaching such unlikely points as the one the Government is now experiencing, which is under great pressure to ensure that the British will not be short of red roses for Valentine's Day. February 14 is a big date in the Anglo-Saxon calendar. And not just for romantics, but also for the economy of a country that is in an election year.  From Wednesday, January 31, new controls on animal and plant products from the EU will come into force. Brussels did do its homework and since the UK left the single market at the beginning of 2021 implemented the corresponding checks on British products coming into the bloc.   However, in the UK, equivalent checks for EU imports have been delayed on as many as five occasions. The last time was last year, when the government feared they would make double-digit inflation even worse.  Finally, the government has everything in place. But it is the horticultural industry that is now asking for a new postponement, at least until after Valentine's Day, in view of the problems expected with the start of the new system in the middle of a key month for the season.  The Horticultural Trade Association noted that the process of importing a petunia from the Netherlands has already increased from 19 to 59 steps and warns that the new border is a disaster "waiting to happen." The paperwork, due to start from January 31, will be followed by physical inspections from April and then more required security declarations in October, under a new risk-based system called the Border Trade Operating Model (BTOM).  The Sunak government has admitted that the new checks will cost businesses £330 million in additional red tape. But it argues that they are essential to maintain UK biosecurity while creating a level playing field for British exporters who have faced such checks since 2021. The government has admitted that the new checks will cost businesses £330 million in additional red tape  Experts have warned that some importers, potentially behind thousands of shipments entering the UK in the next fortnight, continue to use an official loophole,known as the 999L exemption, which was introduced to ease the import system after Brexit but will cease to apply on January 31. So deliveries of items ranging from flowers to cheese could be delayed until they reach supermarket shelves where there is already incidentally another added problem.  New rules requiring food to carry labels specifying "not suitable for the EU" are generating confusion and anger among consumers, many of whom believe that the items they are now consuming that are not in the bloc are produced to lower standards.  Since October last year, all meat and some dairy products moving from Britain (Scotland, England and Wales) to be sold in Northern Ireland mustcarry special labels to ensure that the goods do not progress to the Republic of Ireland, a member country of the EU and the single market. The measure was introduced as part of the Windsor Framework, the historic pact sealed in February 2023 between London and Brussels, to put an end to all the controversy created by the new controls that had to be applied to the British province. The so-called Sausage War had Joe Biden himself on tenterhooks and came close to creating a full-blown trade dispute between the UK and the EU.  But Downing Street goes further. From October 2024, all meat and dairy products sold in Britain will also have to carry the special labels to ensure they can also be sold in Northern Ireland. The requirement will apply to more products from July 2025.  Although the UK-wide measures will not be implemented until later this year, some supermarkets in England are already using the special labeling system in preparation. But the "not suitable for EU" specification is generating a great deal of confusion among citizens, many of whom have taken to X (Twitter) to share their outrage.  "My milk now says not for EU. can you confirm that this is simply due to UK bureaucracy and that it still meets EU safety standards? I'd hate to think it's a special Brexit milk that is not safe for Europeans," reads one comment.  Another posted a photo of a ham in Sainsbury's: "We're guessing we don't meet EU food safety standards. Good enough for the little Brits who thrive on second rate everything though." "Now we're eating any crap," complains another user.  Apart from some divergences on pesticides, British food standards so far remain virtually unchanged since Brexit. A government spokesperson explained to Politico that "the Not for EU label is simply designed to help retailers and supermarkets move food and drink products between Britain and Northern Ireland as smoothly as possible." "It means that suppliers will not have to set up different production lines in order to sell products in Britain and Northern Ireland, ensuring that products remain on the shelves and consumer choice is maintained," he qualifies.  But exporters are outraged, and food policy experts don't seem particularly pleased either. "In a food world where labeling leaves much to be desired and has been subject to a lot of politics, for the government to introduce a no for the EU is frankly stupid," says Tim Lang, professor emeritus of food policy at City University London. "It sends mixed signals and raises an understandable question: isn't it good enough - why not for the EU? If not the EU, who, anyone else, lower or higher standards? People's confusion is totally understandable."  For his part, Christopher Elliott, a professor at the Institute for Global Food Security at Queen's University Belfast, added: "Many consumers find food labels confusing enough without the need for another additional layer of bureaucracy." "As many warned and the Government denied, the implementation of so many aspects of Brexit has led to additional regulatory burdens and costs for the industry and, ultimately, higher costs and less choice for consumers. The development of the Windsor Framework is another example of everyone losing out," he adds.  When Tony Blair won a historic victory for Labour in 1997, euphoria was in the air at the school where a young boy named Rishi Sunak was studying. But for the 16-year-old, there was nothing to celebrate. That same evening he wrote an article for the school magazine The Wykehamist lamenting the news. His main complaint: Europe. Blair "revels in the label of a patriot, but has plans for the possible breakup of the UK and membership of an eventual European superstate." The current tenant of Downing Street has always been a Eurosceptic. Pragmatic, but Eurosceptic.  Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
