   A lot has changed for the worse since the last independence referendum Aberdeen Press and Journal October 16, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 28 Length: 1316 words Byline: Struan Nimmo Body   Sir, - It will soon be 10 years since the last independence referendum. A lot has changed since then. I think if we had another Brexit referendum, huge numbers of Leave voters would realise their mistake, just as with an independence referendum, a lot of the No voters would also realise their mistake. There will always of course be those who won't see or admit mistakes. But here we are with Westminster governments now and seemingly in the future hellbent on keeping us out of the EU. Not prepared to admit the mistake or give the people the chance to change their minds. Even though the wheels have long since come off the Brexit bus and the countries of the UK have lost billions in trade and development, especially here in Scotland. In parallel here in Scotland, all the promises, The Vow, the lies, and scaremongering will surely let people see their big mistake by voting No. So as we fall faster and deeper into a UK dictatorship, wanting to tear up the bill of human rights, disallowing protest, denying democracy by not allowing a section 30 order, what can be done? People power - we can all rise up at the next general election with a mass vote for the SNP, and let's leave England to continue their isolationist journey to nowhere. When Scotland leads the way back to Europe, I'm sure it won't be long before the rest of the UK follow. I wonder what people with racist views who voted for Brexit along xenophobic lines think, now that immigration has doubled after leaving the EU. Herbert Petrie, Aberdeen. Happy days at the tattie howking Sir, - Like Ian Gray (Letters, October 11) I remember the tattie howking as being so much fun. I would have been around 11 or 12 and lived in Fife Keith when employed by Burgess of Fife Keith, a tattie merchant who placed us at different farms from Huntly to Moray. Some times we got paid on the day, other times it was end of the week. We lined up at his office and there were around 20 of us. On one farm, we were to be paid by our age. Encouraged by two boys a year older than my friend and me, to join their older group, we did get a bigger pay for the day On the way back in the vehicle a few of the schoolgirls who knew our ages went on and on to say "We are telling Burgess." And so they did. I can remember to this day Burgess walking up and down the line asking for the two girls who cheated about their age to step forward. We did of course. I won't mention the boys, but one went on to be an accountant, the other I think into banking. And my pal married a doctor. My name was Flora Simpson at that time. Flora Dempster, Forres. SNP face total wipeout at election Sir, - If the SNP government doesn't pull its finger out and start to govern Scotland properly, then they could be facing a total wipe out at the next Scottish general election. For far too long now the SNP government have done nothing but faff about, as well as dithering, instead of getting on with running the country. They've failed to fix the potholes. They've dithered over the A9 dualling. They've also failed to mend or fix the broken health service, and the education system. Damien Goodwin, Inverness. Brexit was a catastrophe Sir, - My experience of incurring a Brexit-induced cost on holiday triggered responses from Messrs Ian Lakin and George Emslie respectively (Letters, October 9). Both support a failed Brexit, ignoring its negative impact on Britain. Facts never get in the way of beliefs. Their one-dimensional condemnation of EU membership ignores the benefits which represented a significant multiple of our contribution. Compare this to the downside of leaving. Our economy suffers while pre-Brexit EU funding has not been matched by government. Simultaneous to the advent of deglobalisation and a rise in protectionism, Britain chose, counter-intuitively, to opt out: we're a minnow swimming in a sea of sharks. Journalist Will Hutton warned we need to "stop kidding ourselves we're a rich nation and get real". Without London, per capita GDP in the UK ranks alongside that of the poorest US states. Brexit contributed towards inflation, labour shortages and lower investment. The UK is the only G7 country whose economy is smaller, at -0.8%, than it was pre-pandemic. It's unlikely to improve with the OBR predicting long-term decline of 4%. The IMF predicts we will be the slowest-growing economy, among major developed nations, in 2024. EU development and social funding has not been adequately replaced. For example, Brexit-supporting Cornwall, a major beneficiary, is set to get less than half the amount expected from the EU pre-Brexit. Economic necessity dictates, at least, rejoining the single market. We'd be a "rule-taker" but needs must. Stephen Fry was right: "Everybody knows it deep in their bones that Brexit was a catastrophe." Ian D McCormick, Aboyne. Aviemore planning contraventions Sir, - After sending photos clearly demonstrating the effects of the planning contraventions by Tullochs on the houses along the Aviemore Burn, I had hoped for some response telling us about desperately needed urgency coming to bear on the persons involved in letting this happen. I am still waiting. CNPA (national park authority) and Sepa were alerted to these contraventions nearly two years ago and to date have proved to be totally incapable of dealing with the problem. The head of CNPA needs to take charge and put a team in place capable of dealing with this in a timely manner before Tullochs disappear from this site and leave us with the environmental and physical hazard that caused the flooding over the past weekend. Arthur Lay, Aviemore. Bad mussels in Brussels? Sir, - I wonder if George Emslie had a bad plate of mussels mariniere while on holiday in Belgium. This might explain his constant tirades against Brussels. He is quite right however that democracy should prevail. Has he forgotten that 62% of the population and every area of Scotland voted to remain in the European Union yet we were dragged out against our will? I don't know who George's "intellectuals" are but I don't need an "intellectual" to tell me that Brexit has been an absolute disaster for this country. The sooner an independent Scotland is back in Europe the better. WA Ross, Aberdeen. Hugging epidemic is contagious Sir, - An epidemic is sweeping across our country, as contagious although thankfully not as life-threatening as Covid, but seen in all sections of society, even those who wield the reins of power, something that used to be contained within families, now spreading like wildfire to involve work colleagues and on occasion, complete strangers, this phenomenon, embracing, or more commonly known as hugging. Pockets of the more extreme variety have been observed over the past few weeks at party political conferences. Speakers are welcomed on stage with open arms, cheek meets cheek, thankfully for viewers of more delicate constitution, as yet nothing to match the full-on encounter that soured the Spanish victory celebrations on winning the Women's World Cup. The source, some may argue, the studios of the BBC where Strictly Come Dancing programmes are recorded. During younger years my wife and I enjoyed dancing, we went out with friends, we danced with each other's partners without, as seen week after week on our screens, the prolonged episodes of embrace when the music stopped, a reason our friendships continued. Work colleagues were greeted with good morning, an approach with open arms likely to be repulsed by "a skelp on the lug." But real friendship does not need such shows of affection. The great friendship of my life resulted from a meeting one August morning in 1943 when together we entered school for the first time. Eighty years have passed since that day. In all the years our physical contact has been confined to shaking hands in congratulation on our wedding days and sadly on the death of my wife. So much show nowadays, so little substance. Ivan W Reid, Laurencekirk. Load-Date: October 16, 2023  End of Document
