   A warning from Brexit Britain on divisive referendums Taranaki Daily News (New Zealand) September 23, 2023 Saturday Print Edition  Copyright 2023 © Stuff Limited All Rights Reserved Section: News; Pg. 6 Length: 700 words Byline: Opinion Elise Johnson Stuff?s head of content development Body   Closely fought referendums can bring division, surface the ugliest of debates, and could embolden attitudes best left in the past. Take it from a Brit who fled Brexit. In exclusive polling for Stuff from Freshwater, it was revealed that 48% of New Zealanders agreed to varying degrees that ?there should be a referendum on M?ori co-governance, to end the confusion and let every New Zealander have a say?. Only 17% thought it was a bad idea, and 34% were neutral. From this same poll, 28% agreed that ?there should be more co-governance with M?ori in government decision-making?, while 34% were neutral and 45% disagreed. Additionally, the poll revealed that 49% agreed that ?government departments should be known by their English name, not their M?ori name?. The issue with referendums is that they require people to answer a simple yes or no to a question. In this case, the responses would decide whether there should be less or more representation for M?ori. It would be a hard-fought referendum, and the battles for the swing voters would be ferocious. Its decision would define race relations for generations to come. Even a recent migrant can spot the tension around this subject that could poison the debate away from reasonable debate. On top of this, there is no guarantee that promises made to sway voters will be kept after polling day. In the UK, the Brexit referendum is now renowned for its false promises. The most famous promise coming from the Leave side claimed that a vote to leave would create an extra ?£350 million a week for the National Health Service?, which is very much yet to materialise. But putting aside the broken promises, a referendum?s real harm can come from a style of public debate it can legitimise. We can see this playing out in the Voice referendum in Australia. The debate has given a greater platform to conspiracy theories and warnings of reparations. A referendum has the power to morph very quickly from a yes or no debate into whatever you want it to be. That was certainly the case with Brexit. Some were voting on where British laws were being made; for others, it was a protest vote; for others, it was about farmers and fishermen. For some, it was simply an outlet for xenophobia. For both the Voice and Brexit referendums, the incumbent government called the referendums, and both were surprised by the level of opposition against them. If a government believes a certain issue to be important, it can campaign on that issue, and enact it into legislation on election. It is naive to think that a close referendum is democracy in action. Margaret Thatcher called referendums a device of dictators and demagogues that is dangerous to minorities and destructive of parliamentary sovereignty. In referendums, the media is obliged to air all sides of the debate, with the risk of dog whistle politics being given a megaphone. This language can poison the debate, with slurs being thrown on both sides. No matter what the outcome, a referendum like this will make the country more partisan. Xenophobic or even fascist views would be aired ? but equally, even when measured debate was taking place, accusations of racism would also be rife. Giving oxygen and legitimacy to debating all sides of the referendum would embolden and inflame an underbelly of less tolerant views. Certainly, following the Brexit referendum the UK saw an increase in overall racism, not directed towards Europeans but rather anyone who could be perceived as an immigrant. The Opinium survey showed that 71% of people from ethnic minorities faced discrimination in 2019, up from 58% in 2016. New Zealanders would be well advised to look at other countries? experiences with referendums and ask themselves if it is naive to hope that a referendum would settle the matter of co-governance once and for all. It would more likely stoke division and leave scars. Elise Johnson is the head of content development for Stuff?s mastheads, The Post, The Press and Waikato Times, who has moved to New Zealand from Britain. -------------------- CAPTION: British politican Nigel Farage, who helped lead the country?s successful pro-Brexit campaign ahead of the 2016 referendum on Britain exiting the European Union. Load-Date: September 28, 2023  End of Document
