   Alberta's CPP plan has echoes of Brexit The Toronto Star November 8, 2023 Wednesday ONT Edition  Copyright 2023 Toronto Star Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: BUSINESS; Pg. B1 Length: 1277 words Byline: Armine Yalnizyan OPINION Body     At least once a generation, someone has a big idea about how to improve pensions, usually featuring a proposal that gives workers less for less.   The debate, often riddled with confusingly different numbers depending on who is making the case, leaves many young people worrying that they'll have to work until they drop dead.   That fear and the confusion are back because of a proposal from Alberta Premier Danielle Smith to pull Albertans out of the Canada Pension Plan (CPP).    She says they're overpaying. They're not.    She says the move will save Albertans money. It won't.   Saving money on contributions to CPP is unachievable without Smith's fantasy math, namely that CPP would cede 53 per cent of its projected 2027 assets to Alberta, or $334 billion.    Nobody believes Alberta will walk away with over half of the assets of the country's pension plan. Alberta accounts for only 12 per cent of the Canadian labour force, and 16 per cent of total CPP contributions (due to a higher employment rate and higher earnings). But without that bag of cash, Alberta can't deliver on its promise to lower premiums for the average Albertan by $1,425 a year.   The suggestion that Albertans overcontribute is based on the actuarial reality that Alberta is the youngest province in the federation, with fewer seniors than anywhere other than the Territories. (Currently 18.8 per cent of Canadians are seniors, but that number drops to 14.8 per cent in Alberta.) That means, for now, more Albertan workers are contributing to, rather than drawing from, the CPP, because they are younger ... same as any other Canadian.   But population aging doesn't skip over geography. It's just coming later for Alberta than it has in the eastern provinces. The population of Albertans aged 65 and older is expected to double in the next 20 years, a faster increase than in any other province.    If it goes solo, Alberta's lower public pension premiums today will almost certainly be higher tomorrow.   More importantly, Alberta isn't that big. There were 19.8 million contributors to CPP and Quebec's QPP in 2020, according to final tax statistics from the Canada Revenue Agency. Of those, 2.2 million were from Alberta.   There's strength in numbers, particularly when it comes to money. Bigger funds more effectively pool risk and can create greater stability for future needs.    The proof is in the returns. CPP's net return on investment on $539 billion of assets grew at an annualized rate of 10.8 per cent over the past 10 years, the highest 10-year growth of any global pension fund.    In Alberta, the investment body managing $158 billion in pension assets saw a return of 7.2 per cent. The Quebec Pension Plan earned an 8.3 per cent return on $383 billion in assets. Bigger is better, for security and affordability. Smith used to agree.   At the end of Alberta's May 2023 provincial election campaign, Smith said "no one is touching anybody's pension," adding that the very notion was part of a misinformation campaign by her opponents.    Never mind that the United Conservative Party had just elected Smith as leader five months earlier, at an annual general meeting that endorsed a policy resolution to cleave Alberta from the CPP.    The concept's roots run deep among Alberta conservatives. Former premier Jason Kenney voiced the idea of getting Albertans out of the CPP on Smith's radio talk show in 2019. In 2000, Stephen Harper said Alberta needed a "firewall" to protect the province from the feds, including control over its own pension funds.   That was before Harper became the leader of the federal Conservatives and moved to Ottawa to lead the nation on the ticket of "The West Wants In." It's easy to get confused. Which is it? In or out?   Although taking offence at all things federal (especially Liberal) can be traced to at least the 1930s in Alberta, these days Conservatives grab any reason to reject anything beyond their direct sphere of influence, even if it makes sense and is working great ... like the CPP.   It's not unlike Brexit.    In 2013, then-U.K. prime minister David Cameron announced his intention to hold a referendum on British membership in the European Union, which it had joined in 1973. The Leave/Brexit slogan was "take back control." The biggest whopper from a years-long disinformation campaign came in the form of campaign buses splashed with an astonishing "fact": "We send the EU £350 million ($592 million) a week. Let's fund the NHS instead. Vote Leave."    It was pure deception. The U.K. received regional subsidies from the EU, bringing the net cost of being part of the world's largest single market (27 nations, 500 million people, 13 trillion euros ($19 trillion) in GDP) to £188 million ($312 million) a week, not £350 million. The Vote Leave team had no intention of replenishing the budget of the beloved but critically underfunded National Health Service. But repeating the lies weakened voters' resistance. After years of leaning on the side of remaining in the EU, on referendum day 52 per cent voted Leave.   With the NHS is in tatters, and all-important trade relations gutted, British consumers, workers, employers and investors lost a gamble based on tragically misleading math. Last month, a new poll showed that only a third of voters thought leaving the EU had been the right thing to do.   Smith and the United Conservative Party are eerily echoing Brexit. Their Take Back Alberta campaign comes complete with fantastical math, deceitful claims and dogmatic leadership.   The people driving this process earn six figures. They don't need to rely on CPP when they retire.   The maximum amount a Canadian retiree can get on CPP is $1,306.57 a month, or less than $16,000 a year. The average Canadian retiree gets less than $10,000. Millions of workers need this future guarantee to work, not be mismanaged in return for scoring a political point.   How much money you can count on, at what age, when you retire is critical. Portability is key, since many Alberta workers come from other parts of Canada and return to retire. It's all at risk, not just for Albertans, but for all contributors to CPP.   This is a decision about workers' futures that workers reject. Only 21 per cent of Albertans said they wanted to leave CPP in a poll carried out in April, before the last provincial election. That figure fell to 19 per cent more recently.   Whatever the results of the referendum, quitting CPP isn't an Alberta-only decision as currently portrayed. Seven provinces, representing two-thirds of the population, must agree to the terms of the "divorce."    How likely are they to agree to a deal with Alberta that means their own voters pay more and get less, just so Smith and her party can claim a win.    Still, as Brexit taught us, the power of misinformation shouldn't be underestimated. This is pure politics - how many people stand behind an idea - not how much economic sense it makes.   As more economic decisions get made by referenda, they increasingly become a test of who controls the narrative. You'd love to trust democracy to get it right, but we've moved from evidence-based decision-making to decision-based evidence-making.   Federal Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland and  Smith will marshal different economic facts to make their respective cases. But in a cage match of mathematicians, the win isn't due to the most compelling numbers. It comes down to who you trust most. In the 1960s we trusted one another to create a Canada Pension Plan that worked for all. The all-too-common answer in 2023 is: the only person you can trust is yourself.    That's so Alberta. That's so Brexit. That would be such a loss.    Twitter: @ArmineYalnizyan  Load-Date: November 8, 2023  End of Document
