   An appetite for innovation helps hospitality face its challenges Jersey Evening Post February 15, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 Jersey Evening Post All Rights Reserved  Length: 1960 words Byline: By Body   FROM restricted market size and complex labour laws to post-Covid behavioural changes and Brexit supply-chain disruption, Jersey’s food and hospitality industry has had more to deal with than most.  On top of the food inflation and cost-of-living pressures that the UK and the rest of the world are dealing with, Jersey’s island economy and distinct labour market mean that it has particular challenges. There is hope, though, and, through conversations with chefs and restaurateurs at all ends of the market, exciting innovations and adaptations are providing a path forward for the industry in Jersey. Labour market Whoever you speak to in the hospitality industry, wherever they are in the world, they will cite the jobs market as one of their biggest problems.  In the UK, 96% of hospitality businesses state it as their primary concern that has been exasperated and changed by Brexit. In Jersey, the situation is even worse. Although Jersey was never a part of the European Union, when the UK withdrew its membership in 2020, EU nationals lost the right to live and work in Jersey without a visa. At this point, nine-month work permits were introduced for certain industries, including hospitality, fishing and agriculture.  In February 2023, Home Affairs Minister Helen Miles confirmed changes to that work permit system which would allow migrant staff to work in the Island for a full year, with the additional option to renew those licences for up to three years before leaving Jersey.  Speaking at the time of that announcement, Jersey Hospitality Association co-chief executives Marcus and Ana Calvani said: “Finding qualified and professional staff to fill the vacancies in our industry is an endless challenge to business owners, made worse by Brexit and the pandemic.” The original work permit policy had been developed in the early 1980s when the intention was to restrict immigration in order to protect the jobs of local people. Now, significant staff shortages across the Island have prompted changes and many businesses believe that those from last year did not go far enough. Some say the intricacies of the licence system favour larger businesses and the fact that every individual permit has to be tied to a specific role at a specific business offers little to no flexibility for small businesses.  Finding people who care passionately about the job that they are doing in the hospitality industry is also seen as a problem, even if those work permits are approved. There is a view that the level of formal hospitality training in Jersey or the UK is not as high as in other parts of Europe, such as France and Spain, and the industry is not as aspirational. There, hospitality schools are seen as a genuinely attractive alternative to university, whereas in Jersey and the UK, cooking and meal planning are relatively absent from school syllabuses. Many think that this is all too often reflected in the attitude of people in the industry and exacerbates recruitment challenges even more. This is also the view of Jamie Hooker, founder of the Dandy coffee shop in St Helier. “I think it’s getting people who want to do jobs,” he says. “People who really want to do the job. I think a lot of the time hospitality is seen like, ‘Oh, I can’t find a job any- where. I guess I’ll work in hospitality’. It would be the easiest thing in the world just to put people into a shop and be like, cool, there you go. That’s how it all falls apart too quickly, when you’ve got the wrong people that don’t necessarily care.” Dominic Jones, chief executive of JPRestaurants, which owns and runs the Oyster Box, Crab Shack, Banjo’s and Cafe Ubé, sees a similar problem but suggests a different solution: making the industry more attractive.  “One of the challenges here in Jersey is recruitment, getting people to come and live here,” said Mr Jones.  “We have complex housing laws, which means that I can’t just go and rent a house to put myself in. Incomers have to live in certain types of accommodation, which is often not as good as that available to locals who live in the Island. We can’t bus somebody in from a cheaper place to come and live. They live in an expensive place, so it has become increasingly difficult.” Jersey’s economy is, of course, dominated by the high-paying finance industry. In comparison, agriculture and hospitality are at the bottom end of the pay scale. The solution? Mr Jones believes that the only answer might be making the living wage obligatory for all businesses, as he has done across his group. “Honestly, if we just bite the bullet, like they have done in France, we will have a much more vibrant industry,” he says.   Smaller businesses who have less capacity to absorb those added costs and are already on the brink, may disagree. Covid-19 and changing behaviours The Covid-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdowns were catastrophic for many hospitality businesses.  The more long-standing impact has been the way in which work and life patterns have changed for many people. In Jersey, the financial and legal sectors make up 21% of jobs, whereas in the UK that figure stands at 3.6%. Finance has also been one of the slowest industries to return to the office after the pandemic, and that has affected the trade of shops and cafés in St Helier significantly.   Mr Jones said: “We have a large finance industry. People are working from home, they’re not coming in. So not only are they not working from the office but they’re not buying lunch every day.”   For Mr Jones, this means that while there may have been downturns in business in town, that has been made up for in other areas.  “Actually, it’s a nice balance that we have across the business. If one area is not doing quite as well, the other one may be more popular. We’re seeing a lot more growth outside town.” Smaller businesses such as Dandy’s do not have that same flexibility, though. There, Mr Hooker has been forced to squeeze and change opening times. “Now, there’s no pattern,” he said. “We used to know our week. You would just know which were busy days. You would always know by the hour when people were coming in. Now, we’ve had to pinch the hours. At the moment we do seven till two – it used to be six till four.” The industry, like others, has been forced to adapt over time and will continue to do so. “We’ve looked. We’ve adapted. We always adapted,” says Mr Hooker. “Look at the business we are today compared to what we were ten years ago – it is a completely different business.  “We have to keep changing to stay attractive, and we have to be realistic with the way markets change. We can’t just keep doing the same thing or we will get the same result.” In the meantime, though, that period of adaptation will no doubt be difficult for many and catastrophic for some. Supply chains Another area in which Jersey is presented with unique challenges is its supply chains. By its very nature, the Island is heavily reliant on daily deliveries by boat with Covid disrupting the way that those “just in time” supply chains work even more significantly.   Mr Jones says that “both post-Covid and during Covid there was a really disrupted supply chain; even today it’s made a huge difference in terms of supply, and things go out of stock much more regularly. You’ve got Brexit that’s created issues that are settling down a bit now but those sorts of things have definitely impacted food arriving in the Island.” Much more significant, Mr Jones believes, is the size of the market and how that limits supply chains and availability.   “The lack of competitiveness means that it’s quite difficult to source things,” he said. “I think one big reason is that it’s difficult to hold a lot of stock here. And when we do want stock, often that will be stuff that if we try and get something exclusive or different or new, it gets sold to everybody else. And so that differentiation and exclusivity becomes difficult in a small island. A lot of the time, it’s not necessarily the suppliers’ fault.” This is another area where Brexit has had a huge impact, according to Mr Jones. “Before, we would send a van over on the boat and we’d be able to go and buy produce in France. That has completely died now.” As much as that is a significant issue for larger groups such as JPRestaurants, the problem is even bigger for small businesses. Their ability to order in bulk is reduced even further and they become almost entirely reliant on others. Mr Jones points out that the size of the agriculture industry is also small and limited in the Island. “I think agriculture has been dominated here by the Jersey Royal potato. It’s become very intensive,” he said, explaining that although the crop is extremely important to the Island’s economy, a lack of diversity means that other plants and produce must come from abroad. Inflation and cost  of living Some pressures are not limited to the Island: food inflation and the rising cost of living have affected the UK and are being felt here too. These rising prices hit hospitality businesses twice, as they are forced to pay more for their products as well as seeing customers thinking much more carefully about where to spend their money. Businesses try to absorb those costs themselves as much as possible to keep customers coming through the doors. That isn’t always possible though, as Mr Hooker from Dandy explains: “If you were to look at our prices we’ve always been consistent. We’ve always tried to price-match like everybody else – but Jersey dairy milk is £1.60 a litre now. I mean, it’s difficult. We have put prices up recently.” There are ways to adapt to those pressures and Dandy has managed to avoid some of those price rises. “Because we make a lot of stuff in-house, like the bread that we make, it is cheaper than buying it in. We have the luxury of using much better-quality products than anything we can buy in. Because of the hours that go into making it, it works out cheaper, so that’s definitely a bonus, which helps us significantly with the costs and to be relevant and competitive within the market.” Mr Jones has seen similar issues but, like Dandy, he is finding ways to adapt. Across his restaurants, he has noticed that people are more focused than ever on value for money.  “What’s really interesting is that it’s not actually often about how much people spend, it’s about how they perceive the value they’re getting,” he said.  This has led him to introduce “market menu” prices across his restaurants and although they are far less profitable on the surface, they have driven footfall up by 20% compared with last year and see people spending more in other areas, such as with their wine. Above all, as people choose more carefully where to spend their money, it is premium brands such as Dandy and the Oyster Box that feel they are doing best. People may well be eating out less than before but when they do, they want to make it extra special.  Mr Hooker says that “the branding of the business from day one has been affordable premium. We are very much seen as an aspirational lunch break choice, which has helped. You’re very much getting good value.” So, in Jersey and elsewhere, the hospitality industry is facing more challenges than ever before. Excessive red tape, rising costs and the complex nature of an island economy are forcing businesses to adapt and innovate in new and exciting ways. That is where the hope lies. Jamie Hooker perhaps sums it up best: “It might be a controversial thing to say, but there’s a lot of money here in Jersey. It’s lovely seeing all these new and exciting projects open. There’s a huge amount of passion and a huge amount of dedication that I like to think will shine through in the end.  “There’s an appetite for it, and people deserve to do well, and I think that they will.” Load-Date: February 16, 2024  End of Document
