   An unmitigated disaster that has shrunk our labour pool, slowed our economy and robbed us of our freedoms; BROKEN BREXIT RECORD VIEW Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 19, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 977 words Body   BREXIT has been an unmitigated disaster for Scotland. It has slowed our economy, tangled up our trade in red tape and shrunk our pool of labour. More than that, when Scots lost their European citizenship, they lost freedoms and rights as part of a bigger world that many held dear. Thanks to the Tories' bloodyminded hard Brexit, our world has got smaller, as we lost freedom of movement to live and work in Europe as we pleased. European Union nationals wanting to move here lost that same right too, reducing our workforce at a time we desperately need staff for our businesses and public services. Culturally, we've lost something too, although that's harder to put into numbers. That's why the Daily Record this week is going to shine a light on this broken Brexit - one, we must remember, Scotland never wanted. Seven years ago this month, the UK voted by a slim margin of 52 per cent to 48 per cent to leave the EU. By a margin of 62 per cent to 38 per cent, Scotland voted to Remain. Back then, if we could have peered into the future to see exactly what leaving the EU would look like, perhaps even the most ardent Brexiteers would have second thoughts. Brexit has failed everyone in Britain - but it feels especially galling in Scotland, where some of the consequences have been particularly acute. Take the issue of fishing. Our fishermen were one group in Scotland broadly in favour of a breakaway. It's not too hard to see why. Scots skippers spent decades working under the EU's hated system of quotas as part of its Common Fisheries Policy. The Leave campaign promised them they'd "take back control" of the seas - that the UK would become an "independent coastal state". Later, as PM in 2019, Boris Johnson went up to Peterhead, telling locals at its iconic fish market that Brexit offered a "sea of opportunity". Then, just over a year later, Johnson sold out Scotland's fishing industry to get his Brexit trade agreement with Brussels. As we report today, back in Peterhead, local fishers and traders now feel betrayed, let down and despondent. As one veteran skipper told us: "The politicians came up from London, Boris Johnson came up a couple of times, the highest levels of government came up to Peterhead Harbour, promising this new dawn for the fishing industry - and that new dawn hasn't come." They feel they've been "sold down the river" - because they were - and many see no benefits at all from the deal struck between the Tories and EU. Under the terms of the agreement, significant EU access to Scottish and British waters will remain until at least 2026. After that, the UK and Brussels will begin to negotiate fishing stocks yearly - but locals hold out little hope that will lead to meaningful change. Then we have the NHS - already in crisis thanks to pandemic backlogs and other issues - labouring under the unwanted effects of Brexit too. As we'll reveal in day two of our coverage on Tuesday, our hospitals have been unable to get hold of vital drugs thanks to regulatory barriers thrown up by our exit from the EU. The health service is also, like so many other areas, struggling to recruit enough staff to keep its head above water, having previously relied so heavily on labour from mainland Europe. The Tories' ideological obsession with reducing migration - at precisely the wrong time for the Scottish economy - means they've used Brexit to implement a severe points-based immigration system, hammering the economy on all sides. And as we'll touch on during days three and four of our coverage, that has meant the swift and substantial loss of EU nationals working in other industries. Nowhere has that been felt more keenly than in our struggling but crucial hospitality and tourism sectors, who simply cannot get the staff they need. Firms and workers wanting to come here from abroad must now jump through so many Home Office hoops to get a visa - all while vacancies are through the roof. That's being replicated across our economy too, from warehouses and factories to shops, offices and construction sites. A report in January suggested Brexit has caused a shortfall of more than 330,000 workers across the UK. All this as public anger mounts over the wider economic toll. Expert studies show the brutal impact of trade barriers have already slashed the UK's GDP by as much as 5.5 per cent. The Scottish Government estimates a hard Brexit could cost the Scots economy £9billion by 2030. There's no hope of fixing this with the Tories still in charge. There's no hope of fixing this with the Tories in charge Even those in the party who can see the damage done don't have the backbone to stand up to the Brexiteer zealots in their ranks. While the SNP says what many Scots think about Brexit, it is impossible to separate that from its own drive for Scottish independence, which might not be as agreeable to quite so many. Labour, meanwhile, is fixated on winning power - which for Keir Starmer has meant keeping schtum on Brexit in order to take back that Red Wall in the north of www.England.No poll has ever shown majority support for leaving the EU in Scotland - and since that disastrous referendum in 2016, opinion has only hardened. A whopping 72 per cent of Scots would vote to rejoin the European bloc, a poll found last August. Yet despite all the facts and figures in favour of rejoining, no one seems to be seriously contemplating it. That's a shame. But at the very least, in the coming years, it would be nice to see a sensible government at Westminster start bringing us back into alignment with the single market and free movement. Pointless, wilful destruction from the Tories has left us in the state we're in. A broken Britain with a broken Brexit - and Scotland left to deal with the mess. A report in January suggested Brexit has caused a shortfall of more than 330,000 workers There's no hope of fixing this with the Tories in charge Graphic    BAD DEAL Johnson didn't deliver Load-Date: June 19, 2023  End of Document
