   Bedtime Tories: With Sunak and his pals asleep at the wheel, change must happen Irish Independent November 21, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 903 words Byline: JOHN DOWNING Body   There is a certain type of smug satisfaction I try to avoid - but not always with success. An example is delaying reading the sports pages until after teatime on Sunday, once the bulk of results are in, and taking mild but malign pleasure in counting how many pundits' predictions were badly wrong. Jeremy Hunt, the UK chancellor, comes into my smug satisfaction realm. That strange situation dates from a period in 2018/2019 when I had the bizarre job of sitting just feet from the chamber of one national parliament, Dáil Éireann, while I watched on various screens every detail of the bonkers Brexit doings in another parliament in London. Hunt had come to my attention as he publicly compared the EU with the USSR, at a time when he was foreign secretary and his government was trying to negotiate a post-Brexit free trade with Brussels. He comes to mind now because tomorrow he will make his autumn statement on the UK's struggling economy. I always think Hunt's comments and the remarks by his colleague, Dominic Raab, that as Brexit minister he did not realise how important the port of Dover was to UK trade, are sufficient unto themselves to sum up the epic ineptitude the Conservative Party have brought to the business of government in the UK. It is no wonder the EU chief Brexit negotiator, Michel Barnier, and his well-chosen team danced rings around the group of buck amateurs on the UK side during the divorce talks. One of the spinoffs is that these British Tory bumblers make Ireland's heavy-hitting politicians look like "political Einsteins." But that sentiment brings us close to that unhealthy smugness I cited at the start, and it also smacks of coming at the assessment of politicians from the wrong end, being grateful for a lack of incompetence and mendacity rather than seeking high standards. Doubtless, tomorrow Hunt will try to put the best gloss he can on impending disaster. Part of the disaster is an upcoming Tory electoral wipe-out and the increasingly inevitable prospect of Labour's Keir Starmer taking power - perhaps as early as next autumn - and whose coming, among other things, offers a deal of hope for Ireland. Hunt has no choice at the start of an election year but to try to put the bright side out. But menacing clouds hang over the UK economy and his Conservative government is languishing in the opinion polls, averaging 20 points behind Labour. Money is scarce to buy back voter favour and the portents suggest the Tories could be put out of business for another decade - maybe longer if the florid-tongued Suella Braverman succeeds the ill-starred Rishi Sunak as leader. The Bank of England forecasts flatlining growth next year, a general election is expected by next autumn and must happen by January 2025 at the latest. The BoE has cautioned that recession is possible and the Financial Times reports that taxes are at a 70-year high - yet around 7.7 million people are on hospital waiting lists, schools are crumbling and ministers want to rent space in foreign jails because UK prisons are full. One recalls the summation of former EU Commission boss, Jean Claude Juncker, that the politicians know how to fix these situations - but not how to get elected after they force through the required harsh solutions. In the two-and-a-half years since the main Brexit deal was done, the issue has slid down and almost off the EU agenda. But in the UK it remains unresolved, especially in relation to Northern Ireland. The glorious promises of "Leave" advocates in 2016 - which delivered a 52pc to 48pc win - have been replaced by excuses which have worn thin with an impatient public. The latest UK polls now show 57pc of the public say it was wrong to leave and only 33pc think it was right. Polling also suggests that a vote on rejoining the EU would win by a significant 58pc to 42pc. Yet, for a wide variety of reasons, the UK is not rejoining the EU any time soon. Best that can be hoped for is that Starmer's Labour could work out a very pragmatic relationship, including a UK-EU veterinary agreement, which would help Ireland north and south. Starmer's shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, has pledged to go through the UK-EU trade agreement "page by page" if Labour is elected. There is little enthusiasm in Brussels or elsewhere in the EU for such a big move. But much good work can be done, some of which could eventually defuse the DUP's ill-judged standoff over Brexit solutions contained in the Windsor Framework - if that does not happen sooner. Two members of team Starmer and British Labour may also help Irish issues. One is current shadow Northern Ireland minister, Hilary Benn, who has done good work on Brexit and the North in Westminster committees. The other is former civil servant, Sue Gray, who is now Starmer's chief of staff. Ms Gray is renowned for the Partygate inquiries which were part of the events that eventually toppled Boris Johnson last year. Less well known is that she took a civil service sabbatical break some years ago to run a pub in Newry during the Troubles along with her Irish husband. Right now it looks very like injury-time for the Tories in power. Viewed from Dublin, change cannot come soon enough. 'Jeremy Hunt will try to put the best gloss he can on impending disaster. Part of the disaster for the Tories is the inevitable prospect of Labour's Keir Starmer taking power and whose coming, among other things, offers a deal of hope for Ireland' Graphic    British chancellor Jeremy Hunt, who delivers his autumn statement on the UK's struggling economy tomorrow. Photo: Getty Load-Date: November 21, 2023  End of Document
