   Border checks on animal and plant goods to cost £330mn; Brexit Financial Times (London, England) October 2, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 511 words Byline: PETER FOSTER Body   Planned post-Brexit border controls on animal and plant products imported from the EU will cost businesses an estimated £330mn a year in additional red tape charges, the government has admitted. The confirmation from Cabinet Office minister Baroness Lucy Neville-Rolfe in a letter to a Labour MP follows repeated warnings from the logistics and food industry that the new border checks will drive up food prices. "It will depend greatly on how businesses adapt their business models and supply chains to integrate the new controls regimes. We estimate these new costs of the model at £330mn p.a [per annum] overall, across all EU imports," she wrote in the letter, seen by the Financial Times. From January European businesses exporting animal and plant products to the UK will have to submit additional paperwork; export health certificates, with physical checks costing up to £43 a time being introduced from April 2024. The checks are one of 20 policy changes between now and the end of 2024 that will affect British companies that trade internationally, according to a report last week by the Institute of Export and International Trade. The government has said the new border checks, which have been repeatedly delayed since the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement came into force in January 2021, will add 0.2 per cent to inflation over three years. In her letter to Stella Creasy, chair of the Labour Movement for Europe, the minister said that checks were required because the lack of a border since Brexit has "made it more challenging to intervene to combat threats to animal, plant and human health". In contrast to previous Conservative governments that have delayed introducing a border, Neville-Rolfe said the new border was essential to protect against diseases such as African swine fever that are in parts of the EU. "It would be dangerous to underestimate the huge costs both to lives and livelihoods that an outbreak of these diseases could cause to the UK," she added. The letter cited estimates that "around half" of the £330mn annual extra cost was accounted for by export health certificates, but added that the decision this year to introduce a lightertouch border meant that the figure represented a "saving" for business of £520mn from the original border plans. Creasy said the controls represented additional costs for businesses as a result of Brexit, not a "saving" and urged the government to urgently rethink. "British companies struggling with border paperwork to import food will have little choice over these charges meaning it's likely British consumers will have to pick up the bill," she said. Trade and logistics groups said the border would drive up costs in the short to long term, adding that the £330mn estimate did not represent the full costs of the past three years of Brexit uncertainty. Shane Brennan, chief executive of the Cold Chain Federation, said: "It's a shame it's taken so long to admit this candidly. What's not included in this original estimate is the cost of confusion, delayed deadlines and ongoing uncertainty." Load-Date: October 1, 2023  End of Document
