   Boris Johnson got Covid so wrong - an inquiry here will reveal where we failed Irish Independent November 3, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 1052 words Byline: MARTINA DEVLIN Body   'We decided "to roll the dice," is how political strategist Dominic Cummings described a decision to put Boris Johnson into 10 Downing Street. Cummings admitted he felt Johnson was unfit for high office, but thought he could control him. So, his masterplan wasn't "take back control", but "control Boris". Except he couldn't. That "roll the dice" admission was a fireworks moment during the UK's Covid inquiry. Six months after Johnson became prime minister, the first two patients in Britain tested positive for the coronavirus in January 2020, and a pandemic followed. Ireland was only a few weeks behind. Cummings, the former chief adviser to Johnson, told the inquiry he wasn't sorry he had orchestrated Johnson's elevation, despite everything. An ardent Brexiteer, he justified it on the grounds of getting Brexit done - as chair of the Vote Leave campaign, he had skin in the game. Brexiteers were furious and felt thwarted in the summer of 2019 because Brexit still hadn't happened. Cummings told the hearing how "we" had a choice, saying: "Do we allow this once-in-a-century constitutional crisis to continue, meltdown and possibly see [Labour leader] Jeremy Corbyn as prime minister and a second referendum on Brexit, which we thought would be catastrophic for the country and for democracy, faith in democracy? "Or roll the dice on Brexit and try to control him and build a team around him that could control him? We didn't take that choice lightly… but we thought the combination of a second referendum and Corbyn was so bad that we should roll the dice." Who exactly "we" were and why they had the right to reach private decisions on the best course of action for Britain wasn't made apparent, but it's a fair guess they were people for whom democracy is an irrelevance when it conflicts with their wishes, despite Cummings using it to bolster his argument. Fundamentally, the strategy was to put Johnson into high office and manipulate him. That was regarded as preferable to further Brexit delays, or another referendum, or a general election that might sweep Labour to power. For Cummings, a foul-mouthed kingmaker with a shabby take on democracy, Brexit was always the priority. He wasn't a witness you'd bet the house on, but his information served as a useful window into how elites carve up power. Their relationship ended acrimoniously, and Cummings was sacked by Johnson in November 2020 at the pandemic's height. You can only imagine the temper tantrums thrown. Or maybe we won't have to imagine - perhaps other witnesses will offer details of expletive-heavy screaming matches between would-be puppeteer and the puppet-premier who stopped doing as he was told. WhatsApp messages read out at the proceedings (followed by broadcasters apologising to audiences for their consistently profane language) showed how tempestuous their relationship had become. It will be box office when Johnson arrives to give his evidence, rummaging through his hair and quoting Latin tags, but presumably avoiding "non ducor, duco" - "I am not led, I lead". Will he hit back at Cummings? More importantly, will his answers shed light on how future pandemics should be handled? The political culture Johnson presided over cost lives. That's something he must live with. Cummings helped to give him that power. That's something he must live with. The purpose of the inquiry is to learn lessons - no one will be found innocent or guilty, it will not result in sanctions or court cases. But some eyes might be opened. It might concentrate minds at elections. And it might act as a deterrent to parties tempted by a leader who is all personality and no substance. He has always been style over substance. That was viewed as forgivable - until it wasn't. Johnson was "an experiment in celebrity government", according to his former Daily Telegraph editor Max Hastings. But as early as 2019, Hastings predicted his premiership would "almost certainly reveal a contempt for rules, precedent, order and stability". Today, no one takes Johnson seriously as a politician, yet he has had the privilege of a high-achieving career that took him from London mayor to the Foreign Office to 10 Downing Street. It was a long time before he was outed as an opportunist; now that it has happened, other lucrative lines of work remain open to him. A long line of people has formed to tell the inquiry how the prime minster's role was beyond his limited capabilities, and all the evidence points to an erratic hand on the tiller as Covid-19 ramped up. In Ireland, we were exposed to Johnson's slipperiness, irresponsibility and mixed messaging over Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland well before the pandemic. But when Covid struck, his selfishness and callousness - masked by that "breezy confidence" - extended to a wider ambit. Sir Patrick Vallance, the UK government's chief scientific adviser during the pandemic, noted how Johnson favoured "older people accepting their fate and letting the young get on with life". That attitude was contagious. Former NHS chief Simon Stevens told the inquiry that health minister Matt Hancock thought if the NHS was overwhelmed, the minister and not doctors should decide who lived. The UK's second-most senior civil servant during the pandemic, Helen MacNamara, said female colleagues felt they had become "invisible overnight" and a "macho" culture prevailed. Cummings was among those aggressors, judging by his WhatsApp messages. "I was much ruder about men," he told the inquiry. The political pyrotechnics in London act as a reminder that Ireland still hasn't held its essential review into how Covid was managed. In March, Leo Varadkar told the Dáil he was determined to have one in 2023. Time is running out on that deadline. He quoted former HSE chief executive Paul Reid as telling him the State would probably get 70pc of things right and 30pc wrong, and the Taoiseach said that forecast was about right. But we need to know where we went right and where we went wrong to avoid repeating mistakes. Remember how we were always told there was no pandemic road map? An inquiry should give us signposts, at least. 'Fundamentally, the strategy was to put Johnson into high office and manipulate him. For Cummings, a foul-mouthed kingmaker with a shabby take on democracy, Brexit was always the priority' Graphic    Dominic Cummings, the former chief adviser to Boris Johnson, leaves the Covid inquiry in London. Photo: Reuters Load-Date: November 3, 2023  End of Document
