   Brexit argument is far from over Evening Chronicle October 4, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 26 Length: 389 words Body   AN interesting contribution to the Brexit debate (Mike Bradley, letters, September 28). But the language of certainty is adopted without justification and a whole paragraph is based on a fiction. Let me explain: Nobody knows the future. I accept you might be right in claiming the economic consequences of Brexit will be bad for the UK. But to suggest the argument is over, that the Brexit bird is "definitely deceased" is premature. Greater alignment with Europe - the current Labour position - has the potential to change everything. The NI Protocol is great. Rejoining the Horizon programme is a brilliant move. An intelligent government could do lots more similar small scale alignments. Predictions of inevitable economic doom for our country are without merit. When something hasn't happened it is philosophically unsound to suggest it is certain. What can be said for sure is that Brexit has widened the range of possible futures open to the UK government. And, of course, repaired the democratic deficit resulting from our membership of the EU. And that fiction I mentioned earlier? You say "Tony Benn was a prominent Eurosceptic but this was long before globalisation and the adoption of the EU Social Chapter". Spend five minutes doing the most cursory research on the net and you'll find his lifetime of campaigning stretched well beyond these events. He was even speaking to students at the Oxford Union as recently as 2013. Arguing, as ever, for strong cordial relations with mainland Europe while retaining our independent nation status. Never has there been a more enthusiastic political debater. And as a compulsive recorder of events his views are provided for us to read in scores of publications. There is an admirable consistency displayed in his writings. Today they are more relevant than ever. For any unbelievers may I direct you to his book, Letters to my Grandchildren, written in 2009. Turn to letter number 28 which he entitles "The European Empire". In a mere seven pages he encapsulates the progressive Eurosceptic case. Its compelling clarity could turn the head of a saint! It's fair to say that EU membership makes life easier in numerous ways. But the trade-off, diminished independence, the excessive pooling of sovereignty and a weakened democracy, is just too high a price to pay. JOHN HODGKINS, Seaton Sluice Load-Date: October 4, 2023  End of Document
