   Brexit issue exposes divisions in Lib Dem ranks as Davey rules out plan to rejoin EU i-news September 26, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 447 words Byline: Chloe Chaplain Body   Lib Dem leader Sir Ed Davey has faced down calls to maintain his anti-Brexit stance after he conceded that his party would not seek to rejoin the European Union (EU) or the single market. Members at the party's annual conference accused the leadership of dodging the issue of Brexit ahead of the election and Sir Ed was forced to rule out a campaign to rejoin despite insisting that reversing Brexit was still a "long term" ambition. It came as the party's leadership faced a rebellion over its attempt to backtrack on implementing house-building targets. The planning policy, and Sir Ed's stance on Europe, have exposed divisions over how the party should approach next year's election campaign. The Lib Dems have repeatedly refused to rule out a pact with Labour and the shift in Brexit policy takes the Lib Dems closer to Sir Keir Starmer's promise to build a closer relationship with the EU. One Lib Dem MP denied Labour and their party were edging closer on policies on Europe in order to make their stance more aligned. "We have always been clear that we are the most pro-European party and have been consistent on that," the MP told i. "But we have to be realistic about making a pledge to rejoin the EU. And voters I speak do just do not want to talk about Brexit on the door, even those pro-Remain ones." A senior party figure said putting an aggressive anti-Brexit position at the centre of its election campaign would be a repeat of the mistake made in 2019, when the Lib Dems failed to make gains with their promise to keep Britain in the EU. The source said: "One of the things we learned at the last election was that we have got to take people with us." A Lib Dem candidate defended the position, saying: "We can't promise to rejoin straight away because the EU wouldn't want to have us." But the candidate called for the party to talk more about the issue. Wendy Chamberlain (inset), deputy leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, dismissed suggestions that the party could lose votes to Labour as a result of the change. Pressed on the issue on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Sir Ed said the Lib Dems are "a pro-European party" who "want Britain back at the heart of Europe". But he conceded that rejoining the EU "currently is not on the table". Asked specifically about rejoining the single market and customs union, Sir Ed said: "Well again, currently that's not on the table." "At the next election, and beyond the next election, Liberal Democrats will be making the economy and the health service our core issues." Wendy Chamberlain said: "I don't think anybody has any doubt that the Liberal Democrats remain the most pro-European UK party, whatever Labour might be saying." Load-Date: September 26, 2023  End of Document
