   Brexit is not to blame for UK inflation, say experts i-news September 20, 2023 SC1 Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 9 Length: 423 words Byline: Hugo Gye ; Fergal Jeffreys Body   Britain has been hit worse by inflation than other large economies because of its energy market and labour shortages - not because of Brexit, economists have said. The UK has the highest inflation of any G7 country, according to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), with the rate averaging 7.2 per cent this year. Experts blamed Britain's strong reliance on imports of natural gas, which have become much more expensive since Russia's invasion of Ukraine last year, as well as shortfalls in the number of workers since the pandemic. Pranesh Narayanan of the centreleft think-tank Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) said: "The UK has faced some unique issues compared to other countries. The UK has a higher reliance on natural gas, so as natural gas prices soared last year the UK was particularly vulnerable to that. "France has a much higher nuclear capacity, so they were shielded from natural gas prices. The UK's import dependence on things like food as well has played a part." Julian Jessop from the free-market Institute of Economic Affairs added: "The most important factor is energy prices. We saw a relatively large rise in energy prices because of our reliance on gas. We also seem to have lost more workers than most others during the pandemic." The Government is focusing its policy response on easing labour shortages by encouraging older people to re-enter the workforce, and reducing the number of people who are off work long-term because of illness or disability. Pro-European campaigners have claimed that Brexit has exacerbated the inflation problem, by reducing the number of workers imported from the EU and imposing new costs on firms that do business with the continent. But James Smith, research director of the Resolution Foundation, said: "The Brexit effects will be there, some of the friction introduced will affect food prices. I have to say, though, it's a bit second order relative to the global shocks we've had in terms of energy and food, the pandemic hangover." Mr Narayanan added: "I think Brexit would have had an impact, but it is hard to tell how big that impact is. A lot of the import barriers that would have happened after Brexit, the Government has delayed them." Clare Lombardelli, the chief economist of the OECD who previously worked for the UK Treasury, said: "The UK has seen slightly higher inflation than previously expected. The Bank of England, as with other central banks around the world, is right to be very vigilant about the data and what it is showing." Load-Date: September 20, 2023  End of Document
