   Brexit 'not all bad', says Bank chief; Bailey: new opportunities in spite of drawbacks The Times (London) October 5, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 29 Length: 465 words Byline: Patrick Hosking Body   Brexit has "actually created opportunities" for Britain, the governor of the Bank of England said yesterday, while conceding that the short-term impact had been negative. Andrew Bailey separately warned of the danger of "further large shocks that we don't know about", as financial markets wobbled over fears that interest rates are staying higher for longer. In a wide-ranging interview with Prospect magazine, the governor also admitted that the Bank was "absolutely useless" at communicating with pictures and simple phrases and found using short sentences "hard". Bailey said that while leaving the European Union was hitting productivity and growth in the short term, it did have more positive potential, while the worst predictions for Brexit had proved exaggerated. "I think the post-Brexit landscape does give us opportunities," he said. "You know, I've always said, not everything about EU regulation was bestsuited to any national circumstances. If you go back to the period after the referendum, there were pretty dire predictions about the consequences of Brexit for the financial services world, for the City of London. And I think so far those effects have been smaller." Some of the gravest warnings came from the Bank itself and Bailey personally, who, as deputy governor before the referendum in 2016, said that Brexit could weaken growth and that it was the Bank's job to highlight the risks. Bailey said the global political world was more unstable and that central banks "had to be prepared for whatever comes next. There could be very large shocks that we don't know about at the moment." The warning came as financial markets bet on borrowing costs staying higher for much longer. Yields on US treasuries and UK long-duration gilts surged, with analysts warning that such movements had heralded stock market crashes in the past. Bailey defended the Bank's record on setting interest rates, saying it had been right to be concerned about the risk of a sharp rise in unemployment as furlough support was withdrawn in 2021. The Bank chief, who came under fire for calling for wage restraint last year while receiving a £575,000 package, was unrepentant. "It's easy sometimes to sit in sort of your own privacy and say, 'Well, I was right, wasn't I?' " He also claimed to have been vindicated after warning about surging food prices, though he apologised at the time for sounding apocalyptic. "I was probably a bit right about that as well." He suggested the government, not only the Bank, had a role in taming inflation. "In the short run, the response has to come from monetary policy. But in the medium to long term, it often involves a broader set of issues in terms of choices and policies that go beyond the Bank of England's responsibility." Financial disaster ahead? Pages 30-31 Load-Date: October 5, 2023  End of Document
