   BREXIT BOOST BRINGING BUSINESS BACK TO BRITAIN; BRITAIN REAPS BREXIT DIVIDEND The Express August 14, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,4,5 Length: 858 words Byline: Giles Sheldrick Body   FIRMS are benefitting from Brexit by bringing business back to Britain. A quarter of UK manufacturers say that they have "repatriated" the production of goods. The job-boosting move is seen as a sign British manufacturing can again become a significant global player. Metal firm boss Rowan Crozier said: "The opportunities are there. They're starting to be realised on shopfloors all over the country. However, there is ONE a big skills challenge to make sure we have the technical competences to seize this once-ina-generation opportunity. If we build the skills base I'm pretty certain global business will come." Tory MP and Express columnist Esther McVey could not hide her delight at the news. She said: "This is exactly the type of Brexit boost many of us campaigned for in the referendum. "British businesses investing more in home-grown talent is exactly what we envisaged - and it is fantastic that we are beginning to see signs of this happening. "There is more we can do to make the most of our Brexit freedoms, but this shows the appetite is there for the benefits a truly independent UK can bring." Despite doom-mongers writing off global Britain, Brexit has given huge opportunities to firms that are the economy's backbone. Since we quit the EU bloc on January 31, 2020, Mr Crozier's Birmingham-based company Brandauer, a 160-year-old family firm, has secured more than £2million of new business with clients in France, Holland and Slovakia. It has invested heavily in technology and staff to offer prices that rival those of China and quality that beats Germany. Central to its success is "re-shoring" back to the UK. The latest state-of-the-nation report into British manufacturing is positive - with 25% of firms saying they have successfully brought contracts back to the UK over the past 12 months. A similar number have started the process. But the latest In-Comm Training Barometer reveals 53% said they would need to invest in boosting workforce skills to bring jobs home. The findings from more than 100 "major player" manufacturers stress that - to seize prizes up for grabs - firms must boost their staff. Gareth Jones, managing director of In-Comm Training, which runs two state-of-the-art technical academies in the Midlands, said: "Engineering and manufacturing seem very buoyant and we constantly hear stories of growth and new opportunities. "Our barometer echoes this, but also paints a picture of a sector hamstrung by lack of skills." Cumbria-based Playdale Playstill grounds employ 100 people and have built 24,000 playgrounds in 51 countries. Managing director Barry Leahey said that with Covid restrictions lifted "we are doing business face-to-face around the world. I would say to people who don't think they can trade internationally after Brexit, it's a mindset. "If you want to come second, don't start. If you want to be top of your game it's like being an athlete. You have to put in the work." Eight in 10 companies say they plan to take on an apprentice next year, almost double last year. It suggests firms are already taking a longer-term approach to overcoming skills shortages. The buoyant mood comes weeks after Jaguar Land Rover ownerTata confirmed plans for a £4billion electric car battery factory in Somerset, creating 4,000 jobs. Tony Hague, boss of PP Control & Automation, said: "Tata's announcement is such a strategically important investment for the UK, not only for the direct jobs it will create but for the downward supply chain required to support it. "Let's use this opportunity to really invest and upskill in the wider engineering sectors." The UK remains the ninth largest manufacturing nation with annual output of £190billion. The positivity pulsating through British business comes as tens of thousands of students are shunning university for apprenticeships. Some 67% of firms hired apprentice in the past 12 months with 97% keeping them all. Twothirds are taking on more over the next year, up from 47% in 2021. Soaring inflation was a barrier to attracting and retaining staff, with 70% of firms concerned about the exodus of experienced staff. The success of global-facing British businesses comes as Freeports gather pace. The zones have simplified customs and brought relief on duties, tax benefits and development flexibility. In March two bids were submitted for Wales. The Celtic Freeport, covering Milford Haven and Port Talbot, and Anglesey Freeport aim to attract £4.9 billion in investments, with a potential to create 20,000 jobs. OPINION: PAGE 12 100,000 SMALL FIRMS LAUNCHED IN OUR RURAL AREAS NEARLY 100,000 small business were launched in the UK over the past year. An increase in women and older founders helped to drive the boom in new firms across the countryside, according to GoDaddy's Venture Forward research initiative. It comes as many moved out of large cities during the pandemic due to increased remote working and better value housing. Data from more than 2.3 million micro-businesses - firms with fewer than 10 employees - revealed that 25.9% are based rurally, up from 24.1% a year ago. Experts at GoDaddy said tech improvements allowed for more firms to launch in more remote areas. Graphic    Pictures: LEILA COKER/SWNSConfident in the future... metal firm boss Rowan Crozier Load-Date: October 31, 2023  End of Document
