   BREXIT must be seen[...]; NIGEL FARAGE'S VERDICT ON LEAVING THE EU EXCLUSIVE The Express September 18, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 943 words Byline: Giles Sheldrick Body   BREXIT has made Britain a global power once more, says the man who helped deliver the EU referendum victory. Nigel Farage believes the UK's standing on the world stage is a vindication of voting to leave. He credits the renaissance of British business, trade deals and new-found diplomatic respect to escaping the Brussels straitjacket. But the former Ukip leader warned the long list of victories would count for nothing unless the deepening migration crisis on our doorstep was resolved. Mr Farage, 59, said: "In global terms, Brexit must be seen as a success. Britain is now a country other sovereign states can do business with. "Winning back self-government does not guarantee we will make the right decisions. It means we have the power to chart our own course." Britain is regarded as the leading power aiding Ukraine's fight against Vladimir Putin, supplying military hardware and diplomatic and strategic counsel. PM Rishi Sunak hosted Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky in May. Brexit opponents have consistently claimed the UK economy had been the worst performing among the prosperous G7 nations since the pandemic. But as Europe stutters, the UK is thriving and pursuing a post-Brexit push to the Asia- in Pacific region, forecast to account for 50% of global expansion by www.2035.UK exports to the EU and the rest of world reached record highs of almost £400billion in 2022, global investment in Britain outstrips comparable economies and the IMF forecasts our economy will grow by 0.4% this year as the limp Eurozone flirts with recession. Tata, the Indian-owned parent company of Jaguar Land Rover, is poised to invest £4billionUK exports 2022, a new record ia b to Som ing 4, c c in building an electric car battery factory in Somerset, creating 4,000 jobs. That comes on the back of commitments worth £32billion agreed with America and Japan, and new trade partnerships with Australia and New Zealand. And Britain's recently-confirmed membership of The Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership - a club worth £12trillion, or nearly one fifth of the world's economy - gives access to a market of 500 million w give ket upwardly mobile people. Signing up has removed costly tariff restrictions among member countries that include Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia and Singapore. The UK remains the ninth largest manufacturing nation in the world with an annual output of £190billion. Deals Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch said: "When Britain voted to leave the EU in 2016 there were many who forecast a grim existence awaiting us outside the bloc. "We were told investment would dry up, jobs would leave our shores, and fewer countries would look to trade with an independent UK. "Those voices of doom have been proved decisively wrong. "It's possible because of Brexit and our ability to go out and strike new deals." Shadow Foreign Secretary David Lammy has proposed regular meetings between UK and EU ministers as part of a relationship reset under a Sir Keir Starmer Government. It is claimed Labour would seek to strike an accord with Brussels as part of an EU scheme for migration burden-sharing. TheTories say it would result in Britain being forced to take more than 100,000 illegal migrants a year. Mr Farage said: "There is no question it was the issue of immigration and border controls that tipped the balance and led to the shock Brexit result. "Yet in this area, above all, many people feel Brexit has been a total failure. The constant stream of small boats across the Channel was something I was trying to warn against when I put up my now notorious Breaking Point poster. "Yet our Government doesn't have the courage or the guts to resolve the issue. And in terms of legal immigration, it's truly astonishing 1.2 million people legally came and settled in our country last year with pressure on housing, the health service and schools. "But the important thing to remember is the power to oversee our futures is now in our hands. "All we need are people in positions of power who believe in it as much as the 17.4 million [who voted leave]." Migration Estimates forecast the UK population will reach 83 million by 2046. YouGov polling revealed 60% think immigration has been too high over the past 10 years. Just 8% think it has been too low. Some 73,364 have signed a Migration Watch petition demanding net migration is reduced to less than 100,000 a year. The think tank said: "We believe everyone allowed to settle in our country should be treated fairly and equally so that they can integrate into British society. "However, immigration, both by legal migrants coming for work or study, and by illegal Channel crossers is out of control. "The UK population has grown by nearly eight million in the past 20 years - 6.7 million of this increase is due to immigrants and their children. We are especially trade recentlyct in gro com cohes concerned about the difficulties in integrating rapidly growing immigrant communities into a cohesive society." Small boat arrivals are rising sharply in Europe. And more than 7,000 arrived in Lampedusa, Italy, last week alone Immigration Minister Robert Jenrick blasted Sir Keir's proposals, saying: "Labour would fling open our doors to hundreds of thousands of illegal migrants, putting more pressure on communities." OPINION: PAGE 12 £400bn Total UK exports in 2022, a new record for b to Som ing 4, the EU 500m Population of the CPTPP free trade pact UK recently joined cohes everyone Small eveo 'Britain is now a country other states can do business with' 'It is astonishing 1.2 million people legally came to settle in our country last year with pressure on housing and schools' Graphic    Glory days...Nigel Farage celebrates the 2016 Brexit result, top. PM with President Zelensky at Chequers, rightPictures: JEFF J MITCHELL/GETTY Load-Date: September 18, 2023  End of Document
