   Brexit was a catastrophe; Letters to the editor Send to - Letters, The Press and Journal, 1 Marischal Square, Broad Street, Aberdeen, AB10 1BL or email letters@pressandjournal.co.uk All letters are subject to editing and must include your full address and daytime telephone number for verification. Thank you. The Press and Journal October 16, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Aberdeen Journals Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 28 Length: 274 words Body   Sir, - My experience of incurring a Brexit-induced cost on holiday triggered responses from Messrs Ian Lakin and George Emslie respectively (Letters, October 9). Both support a failed Brexit, ignoring its negative impact on Britain. Facts never get in the way of beliefs. Their one-dimensional condemnation of EU membership ignores the benefits which represented a significant multiple of our contribution. Compare this to the downside of leaving. Our economy suffers while pre-Brexit EU funding has not been matched by government. Simultaneous to the advent of deglobalisation and a rise in protectionism, Britain chose, counterintuitively, to opt out: we're a minnow swimming in a sea of sharks. Journalist Will Hutton warned we need to "stop kidding ourselves we're a rich nation and get real". Without London, per capita GDP in the UK ranks alongside that of the poorest US states. Brexit contributed towards inflation, labour shortages and lower investment. The UK is the only G7 country whose economy is smaller, at -0.8%, than it was prepandemic. It's unlikely to improve with the OBR predicting long-term decline of 4%. The IMF predicts we will be the slowest-growing economy, among major developed nations, in 2024. EU development and social funding has not been adequately replaced. For example, Brexitsupporting Cornwall, a major beneficiary, is set to get less than half the amount expected from the EU pre-Brexit. Economic necessity dictates, at least, rejoining the single market. We'd be a "rule-taker" but needs must. Stephen Fry was right: "Everybody knows it deep in their bones that Brexit was a catastrophe." Ian D McCormick, Aboyne. Load-Date: October 16, 2023  End of Document
