   Brexit U-turn's heavy cost to UK taxpayers The Express October 9, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 306 words Byline: Martyn Brown Body   SIR KEIR Starmer's desire to reverse Brexit would cost British taxpayers dearly because of EU financial incompetence, Tory MPs have claimed. The warning comes after a report by the bloc's financial watchdog revealed billions of euros in European Union funds are being increasingly misspent. The European Court of Auditors (ECA) said errors in cash paid from the EU Budget had "increased significantly" last year. in Sir Keir provoked outrage last month after he was filmed saying he did not want to diverge from EU rules. In what Tories described as a "monstrous" plan to reverse Brexit, Labour's leader indicated he would align with Brussels if he won the next election. Sir Keir told a centre-left conference in Montreal that UK relations with the EU could be much stronger if both took the same path. Days later, he held a meeting with the anti-Brexit France's President Emmanuel Macron. Tory backbencher Jonathan Gullis last night said: "This report goes to show how Brexit has already saved taxpayers billions of pounds by being outside of the EU. "Keir Starmer wants to reverse Brexit, he has made that blatantly clear with his cosy chat with Emmanuel Macron, which would cost British people in the long run." Auditors at the ECA found money from Brussels being misspent both in the bloc andforeign countries. The EU laid out £169billion in 2022, 4.2% of which was spent inappropriately. Two-thirds of the audited spending, equivalent to 1.3% of the gross national income of the 27 EU member states, was considered risk by the ECA in its annual report. For the fourth year in a row, the auditors found the level of error was "material and pervasive". Frank Furedi, executive director of the MCC Brussels think tank, said: "If auditors wrote such a damning report about business, its chief executive and directors would be expected to resign." Load-Date: October 9, 2023  End of Document
