   Britons regret Brexit, no new direction for the country in sight CE Noticias Financieras English August 13, 2023 Sunday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 477 words Body    It was not for lack of warning. Seven years after the referendum that approved the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (EU), under the isolationist discourse that the country would thus have its fate back in its own hands, most Britons would like to rejoin the bloc. The 52% in favor of Brexit in the 2016 referendum was no longer a solid majority, but today only a third, 33%, insist that the divorce from the EU was the right decision, against the opinion of 55%, according to the YouGov Institute. According to Redfield & Wilton for UK, of those who supported Brexit in the referendum, 36% would change their vote if there were another popular consultation.  Once the separation was complete, the speeches were left behind, and the British had to face the effects of Brexit on their daily lives. On the one hand, the hardships faced by other countries on the continent - such as inflation or the influx of illegal migrants - have not subsided. On the other hand, problems self-inflicted by Brexit have emerged, such as a lack of labor. There is a shortage of farm hands for the harvest. Mechanics' shops in London only have hours available for September - those in a hurry are advised to call the insurance emergency service. Some have taken a year and a half to register their pet at the nearest veterinary clinic, due to the difficulty of replacing foreign employees who had to return to the continent because of Brexit.   Leaving the EU has not only led to a shortage of products on supermarket shelves and fuel at petrol stations. It has also affected prices. Life has become more expensive. Annual inflation stood at 6.4% in June, just 0.1 percentage point below May, when it hit its highest level since November 1991. In July, 2.4 million households failed to pay at least one bill. Add to that the passport-checking queues for summer vacation trips on the continent and the bureaucratic difficulties for exporters and importers to close their deals, the opposite of what Brexit supporters promised.   One study estimates that the UK loses (EURO)100 billion a year from Brexit. The damage is reflected in the low growth rate. In the first quarter, the economy grew by 0.1%, the same rate as in the previous quarter. At the beginning of the year, the British economy was still 0.5% below the level of 2019, before the pandemic, while the American economy was 5.3% higher, the Italian 2.4% and the French 1.3%.  On the political front, the Conservative Party, which has been in power for 14 years, will have to pay the price in next year's elections. A return to the EU is now considered a foregone conclusion, given the complications. There is no European sympathy for the UK, no matter how many polls show public regret. The British will continue to bear the costs of isolation, while the country is left without a clear path to global integration.  Load-Date: August 14, 2023  End of Document
