   Britain rejoins Horizon research fund in 'bespoke' post-Brexit deal with EU i-news September 8, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 474 words Byline: Chloe Chaplain; Hugo Gye Body   The Government has opened the door to further co-operation with the EU after agreeing a long-delayed deal to rejoin the European scientific research programme, Horizon. Rishi Sunak said the UK becoming an associate member of the £85bn scheme after leaving the EU was "the right deal" for the country. And No 10 promised to be "pragmatic" when considering the possibility of other ways of working with Brussels on side deals to supplement the free-trade agreement which economists say has limited Britain's growth since Brexit. Following months of negotiations, the Government confirmed that the UK would return to the scheme with a "bespoke" new post-Brexit agreement, enabling British researchers to apply for grants and take part in Horizon projects, as well as the EU's space programme Copernicus. But the UK has not agreed to take part in the bloc's nuclear technology scheme, Euratom. The move has been hailed as evidence of growing reconciliation between the UK and the EU. Sir Keir Starmer urged the Government to go further, saying: "There is more than just Horizon to get the right progress that we need in our economy. We need an industrial strategy, a real partnership that we will set up." Mr Sunak dodged questions about whether the UK could expect to see more close collaborations with the bloc. Speaking at the University of Warwick, he said that collaboration was "really important" but spoke about links he had helped cultivate beyond the EU. The Prime Minister said: "Well, I think when it comes to the research world, collaboration is really important. The best research is often done across borders, but it's not just about with EU countries. It's actually much more global than that. And that's why this programme is important." A Downing Street spokesman said: "We would take a pragmatic approach on what is in the interests of the UK. That's what Brexit allows us to do." After Brexit, the UK initially continued to participate in Horizon under the trade deal brokered with Brussels but, in 2020, the dispute over trading rules for Northern Ireland meant that it became locked out of the deal. Prior to Brexit, British researchers benefited enormously from the programme, but uncertainty since then has meant there was a large drop-off in grants awarded here. No 10 said the UK would not pay for the time it was excluded - since 2021 - with costs starting from January 2024, and would be compensated for shortfalls in funding during the past two-and-a-half years. Paul Nurse, the director of the Francis Crick Institute, welcomed the news, saying: "This is an essential step in rebuilding and strengthening our global scientific standing." My View, page 19 Science Secretary Michelle Donelan said that UK membership of Horizon would cost around £2bn a year and would "unlock access to the world's largest research collaboration programme" Load-Date: September 8, 2023  End of Document
