   British comedy caused Brexit? Who do you think you are kidding?; 'Allo 'Allo, Fawlty Towers and Dad's Army are the latest additions to the long list of things blamed for the UK's vote to leave the EU. But the British sense of exceptionalism is more likely to begin in the classroom than on the TV screen Irish Independent August 5, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: REVIEW;NEWS; Pg. 4,5 Length: 1431 words Byline: Róisín Lanigan Body   Ihave a confession to make. I have never seen an episode of 'Allo 'Allo (in my defence, it ended the year I was born). Nor have I ever seen any Dad's Army (it ended nearly half a century ago). I've seen one episode of Fawlty Towers (in my defence it was always on TV after school). It was the famous one where Basil Fawlty concusses himself and offends some German guests after telling everyone not to mention the war. He mentions the war a lot. I'm aware of these shows through a kind of cultural osmosis, even having not watched them. Their kind of comedy - slapstick, archaic, the kind of thing your granddad might have watched and that you look on now with a mixture of discomfort and grim nostalgia - is apparently to blame for Brexit. If I'd known they were going to be this important, I would have watched more of them. The charge that British comedy - particularly mid-century British comedy that riffs on World War II - directly contributed to Britain's decision to leave the EU, is one levelled by a new book, British Humour and the Second World War. In one of its final chapters, Professor Gavin Schaffer, a historian and academic at the University of Birmingham, argues that the kind of British exceptionalism embedded in these shows threads a historical needle right down to that fateful summer's day in 2016. "There's nowhere better to see the showcasing of British attitudes", he argues. These kinds of shows tapped "into a vein of thinking that was rooted in war memory, and still potent in the 1980s, even if it didn't serve to add to it". I'm not sure it's that simple. I'm also not sure that what is intended as satire should be taken as fact. Aren't these kinds of comedies the modern (modern-ish at least) replacements for the court jester, the place where it's OK to make fun of ourselves, and each other? "Comedic construction… facilitated a particular war in British memory, a finest hour, albeit a funny and fortunate one, where the greatness of the nation was ultimately realised," Schaffer writes. "The silliness of sitcom, precisely its lack of seriousness, is a key ingredient because it frees both creators and audiences from restrictions and standards that need to be observed in more serious settings, a 'carnivalesque' licence. Or put another way, it is perhaps possible to say more of what you really feel if you can immediately justify your outburst with the idea that you were only joking." What's lost in translation between the creator and the audience with these shows? Nuance, apparently, at least if you agree with Schaffer. Perhaps he's right that these comedies assume a level of cultural competence that audiences just don't have. The idea was that you're supposed to be laughing at the British characters for embodying a very British kind of cultural exceptionalism, rather than the European characters they're supposed to be so different to. Schaffer takes pains to point out that in 'Allo 'Allo, the characters were all written to be as stupid and rotten and doomed as each other. He discusses, at times clunkily, the British ambivalence to the continent and obsession with self-determination. But British papers quickly jumped on his conclusion and not the ambivalence. What started as a theory quickly became: 'Comedy caused Brexit, says snowflake academic'. No nuance! But then, that is the case in everything Brexit-related anyway. XENOPHOBIA It perhaps doesn't help that Fawlty Towers star John Cleese loves Brexit. It shouldn't matter, of course, but it does because Brexit has been such a Sisyphean, Kafkaesque cock-up from start to finish that the British hunger for something to blame knows no bounds. It perhaps doesn't help either that it's true that British culture is obsessed with World War II, and that they will create endless opportunities and situations to talk about this in sitcom and political form. It is true, too, that Brexit was framed as some sort of extension of that war. As a chance to perform some bizarre culturally Churchillian moment. The British electorate just didn't seem to realise that they were re-enacting Churchill's second stint in Downing Street, not his first. Yet can you truly blame them for being so obsessed with the war? You can find it tedious, sure, but wouldn't you too revisit time and time again the only part of modern history in which you played the indisputable part of the good guy? Isn't this the real joke in Fawlty Towers too; not that Germans feel awkward about the war, but that Brits won't let anyone forget about it, that they use it as a veneer for self-esteem and xenophobia? A kind of: how can we hate foreigners? We fought the Nazis, remember! To use these same jokes as a thread to hang it all on, though, it feels too simple. And this isn't the first time we've searched around for something - anything! - to blame the Brexit machine on, something that exonerates, something that stops us looking at the uglier answers. A list of things that are alleged to have caused Brexit, ranked roughly from most to least likely, includes: low levels of education; austerity; fake news; Margaret Thatcher; the north of England; the working class; Welsh independence; Scottish independence; Irish unionism; Irish nationalism; the NHS; millennials; Jeremy Corbyn; and now Fawlty Towers. Kind of. If comedy was to blame for Brexit then surely the reach of these sitcoms wouldn't extend so far. Growing up in Ireland, you're always exposed to British humour - and American humour, which is of course fundamentally less funny. When I think of the DVD boxsets I used to watch on repeat as a teenager in Belfast, they were all British; Green Wing, The Thick of It, Peep Show, Skins, The Inbetweeners. Schaffer says 'Allo 'Allo was so popular partially because "you needed to be British to understand that" but I don't think that's true. You don't need to be British to understand British comedy, or to enjoy it. It's possible to feel in on the joke as they ever were; because they're old-fashioned and politically incorrect to an almost insane degree, because they, as Schaffer says "painted ethnic types an Irish person, as a European, even if it is frustrating that this kind of cultural osmosis only works one way (Irish crossover hits, like Derry Girls and Father Ted, are rare, and both of those were broadcast on British networks). This kind of British exceptionalism does prevail. And admittedly there is no doubt that some older British comedies do play into xenophobic and racist stereotypes. It's unsurprising that, as Schaffer points out, a lot of the canon from this era has been wiped from our online www.worlds.No wonder, given how its digital footprint might play out for modern audiences who are more uncomfortable with and sceptical of the 'British gaze'. It's not a generational 'woke' problem either; even at the time, as Schaffer reports, British audiences bristled at some of the ridiculous national stereotypes in 'Allo 'Allo. Nearly 50 years on, though, of course the British values being depicted in these comedies wouldn't resonate with the generation still voting when the Brexit vote came round. And that's not just because we don't actually watch the shows. Not just because the jokes aren't funny any more, if through a white British gaze". It's far too simple to blame comedy (even this offensively old-fashioned style of 'comedy') in its reflection of British exceptionalism, for being the source of that exceptionalism to begin with. I don't think I voted to remain just because I was watching Shameless instead of Fawlty Towers. I don't think people voted to leave because they were doing the opposite. Rather than blaming it all on TV, surely there's more to be investigated (and because Brexit is where nuance goes to die, we won't investigate it) in how many younger Britons, those who grew up with a very different class of entertainment, still held on to the same anti-foreigner biases the characters in these mid-century relics espoused. Britons know a lot about World War II. They're taught about it in school. They know comparatively next to nothing of European history. Many people only learned about the Troubles from Derry Girls. Isn't that lack of European history and European culture an educational fault, rather than something to blame squarely on satire? Brexit, if you believe the comedy argument, is just another indistinguishable casualty of the overblown culture wars. Whatever you do, don't mention the culture wars. Wouldn't you too revisit time and time again the only part of modern history in which you played the indisputable part of the good guy? Graphic    Educational fault: Many people in Britain only learned about the Troubles from Derry Girls'Carnivalesque' licence: John Cleese from Fawlty Towers and Gorden Kaye from 'Allo 'Allo, two sitsoms a new book says played a part in Brexit Load-Date: October 27, 2023  End of Document
