   Cameron's return won't save election - but may save Tories from themselves The Courier November 16, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 30 Length: 795 words Byline: Stuart Nicolson Body   The return of David Cameron to the heart of the UK Government is many things. It is, firstly, a rabbit out of the hat moment of the highest order. To see a former prime minister recalled to serve as foreign secretary is something of a coup for the current resident of 10 Downing Street, and as genuine talking points of government reshuffles go, it undoubtedly tops the list of any in recent times. Rabbits out of hats don't get much bigger. Whether Mr Cameron's comeback will do much to help the fortunes of either Rishi Sunak or the Conservative Party more generally is, however, another question entirely. As one observer put it, just because the ex-PM's political resurrection on Monday morning was a "marmaladedropper" moment doesn't make it either wise or guaranteed to be a success. The move is also a throwback to a bygone era in having one of the so-called great offices of state occupied by someone outside the House of Commons. You have to go all the way back to 1979 when Margaret Thatcher assembled her first cabinet for the last time a foreign secretary was appointed from the House of Lords. Quite what that says about the choices available to Mr Sunak from the ranks of the 350 Tory MPs in the Commons is a fair question. And that leads to another way in which Mr Cameron's return is significant. Has he been chosen just for his experience, contacts and name recognition on the international stage, or also because he represents a different kind of conservatism from that which has been in the ascendency in the years since the Brexit vote in 2016? Mr Cameron's return certainly suggests the party is attempting to move back closer to the centre ground of political debate, which is where elections are usually won from but which the Tories have steadily abandoned in recent years. Whether that is Mr Sunak's intention or not, it is certainly being seen that way by many of the right-wing Tory MPs who these days make up a large chunk of the party's parliamentary group in the Commons. And they are far from happy with the new recruit. For those Conservative MPs who are on the right of the party, some who perhaps pine for the days of Liz Truss and many for whom no form of Brexit is extreme enough - that's to say quite a lot of them - Mr Cameron is a throwback to a Tory party they thought they had consigned to the history books. Cameron is an old school, patrician Conservative who is anathema to many on the right. He is centrist, consensual by nature and, worst of all in their eyes, the ultimate Remainer. He may have instigated the referendum which led to Brexit, but Mr Cameron never intended for the UK to leave the EU. Having won the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence, albeit by a narrower margin than he initially expected, he felt emboldened enough to try and see off once and for all the Eurosceptic wing that had bedevilled his party for a generation. The 2016 referendum was his attempt to shoot the Brexit fox. It was a gamble which failed spectacularly. And for leading the campaign to keep the UK in the EU, Mr Cameron will never be forgiven by a significant chunk of his party, including swathes of its current MPs. It was the long years of opposition for the Conservatives, from Tony Blair's landslide win in 1997 to Cameron's arrival in Downing Street in 2010 which started to fundamentally change the character of the Tory party. It was during those 13 years that the party became more stridently right-wing, with its parliamentary group, in particular, becoming more noticeably rightwardleaning and Eurosceptic than their predecessors in the Thatcher and Major era. The seeds of Brexit may already have been sown before then, but it was in those years of opposition that they were tended, nurtured and grew. With another, potentially long, period in opposition now looming, the Tories should be looking to use that time to reorientate their party back towards the middle ground. The bottom line is that David Cameron's return to frontline politics isn't likely to magically turn around the fortunes of the Conservatives, or change the probable outcome of the next UK election. What it might do, just, is start to change the dial within Conservative ranks, by making them more centrist again and starting to detoxify the brand which has brought us the mayhem of recent years, including the chaos of Brexit and the fullblown madness of Trussonomics. If the Conservative Party has any wisdom left, it will try and recast itself in that centrist space, of which David Cameron is emblematic. Otherwise, they risk retreating even further to the right-wing fringes and remaining in opposition for a very, very long time after the crushing electoral defeat which now seems all but inevitable. The 2016 referendum was his attempt to shoot the Brexit fox Graphic    BACK TO THE FUTURE: Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and Foreign Secretary, Lord David Cameron, during a meeting of the new-look Cabinet following a reshuffle on Monday, at 10 Downing Street. Load-Date: November 16, 2023  End of Document
