   Cameron closes in on deal with Spain over Gibraltar The Independent - Daily Edition November 29, 2023 Wednesday First Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Print Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 645 words Byline: ADAM FORREST POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT Body   The UK and Spain are finally ready to agree a deal on the post-Brexit status of Gibraltar, the Spanish foreign minister has indicated. Jose Manuel Albares revealed he had been in crunch talks with Rishi Sunak's new foreign secretary David Cameron on resolving the long-running row over trade and immigration arrangements. Mr Albares told Spanish media yesterday that he had spoken with Lord Cameron over the phone on Monday, and they had also agreed to meet in person during a Brussels summit that day. The minister suggested the outline of a deal was now in place for a "zone of shared prosperity" in the Spanish area next to the British territory to avoid a hard border on the flow of people and goods. "I would sign a deal with Britain over Gibraltar tomorrow," Mr Albares told the television channelTelecinco - saying both sides "agree that we have to move forward as soon as possible". A UK-EU deal on arrangements for Gibraltar's border - primarily on trade and free movement - was not struck in time for the Brexit deal worked out by Boris Johnson's government. Conservative ministers have been nervous about signing any bilateral deal that could be viewed as reducing British influence over the territory. The Spanish foreign ministry has said the deal would allow Spain to use the Schengen agreement - which allows for the free movement of EU citizens around the bloc - to ease controls on the movement of people. Spain, the UK and the EU have previously agreed to the principle that Gibraltar should remain part of EU agreements on free movement. Mr Albares suggested the UK was also now keen on a frictionless border when it comes to the movement of goods - something akin to the thorny arrangements for Northern Ireland. His ministry said a "zone of shared prosperity" deal would see limited checks "without increasing the risks for the EU internal market" - meaning the UK would have to agree to alignment on Brussels regulations. The Spanish foreign minister told reporters in Brussels: "I think this deal ??? is better for everyone than the application of European legislation after British citizens democratically decided to leave theEuropean Union. There's already been political will on the part of the Spanish government for many months," Mr Albares said on the "generous and balanced deal on the table". He added: "What's needed now is that political will on the part of the United Kingdom to move forward decisively, which is what I've seen so far. But we won't know until the end. Nothing will be agreed until it's all agreed." Despite optimism that a deal is now close, there was no word from Lord Cameron's team on the prospects of an agreement being signed within days. Britain's decision to leave the EU was very unpopular in the British overseas territory, where thousands of people cross the border with Spain every day for work. Just over 95 per cent of the territory's population voted to stay in the EU in the 2016 referendum. The territory's business leaders have been keen for a deal to be struck. Brian Reyes, editor of theGibraltar Chronicle wrote: "Seven years on [from the Brexit referendum], the Brexit levanterstill hangs over our heads." Meanwhile, Lord Cameronis expected to try to meetEU Commission vice-president Maros Sefcovic during his Brussels summit visit - his first trip to the EU capital since his fateful Brexit referendum. The foreign secretary isreportedly ready to raise the issue of post-Brexit tariffs set to be imposed on the automobile industry into force in January if he meets Mr Sefcovic this week. Mr Sunak's government is pushing theEU Commissionto agree to delay the costly new "rules of origin" set to damage the electric vehicle market due to come in at the start of 2024 as part of Mr Johnson's trade deal. The Independent contacted Lord Cameron's team and the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office for comment. Load-Date: November 28, 2023  End of Document
