   Culture workers frozen out of EU to call for urgent action to repair Brexit damage The National (Scotland) September 12, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 299 words Byline: Ross Hunter Body   SCOTLAND-S culture and hospitality workers are set to call for urgent action to be taken to repair the damage wrought on their sectors by Brexit. The European Movement in Scotland (EMiS) - a non-party political pressure group campaigning for a return to EU membership - has invited speakers from across the culture, hospitality and tourism sector to its upcoming Understanding Brexit workshop. They are expected to discuss how the lives of professionals within their industries has been made more difficult by Brexit. For example, one in four singers have been unable to work in the EU following Brexit and many bands and orchestras have reported difficulty in organizing and financing tours. READ MORE: Angela Rayner blanks demands for devolution of employment law The first four speakers announced are Bailie Annette Christie, the chair of Glasgow Life and city convener for culture; Leon Thompson, executive director of Hospitality UK in Scotland; Marc Crothall, chief executive of the Scottish Tourism Alliance; and Katrina Brown, director of The Common Guild, a Glasgow-based visual arts organisation. Others are expected to be announced shortly. EMiS believes that with a General Election looming there is growing appreciation that the UK must reset its relationship with the EU. They hope the Understanding Brexit event on October 21 will help create greater awareness of the problems faced by people within their sectors and spur action from governments in London, Edinburgh and Brussels. David Clarke, the chair of EMiS, said; -This is not about crude 'Brexit bashing' but a grown-up analysis and debate around the issues any new UK government must address to help restore these sectors to health, profitability and global competitiveness-. The event is free with tickets available on Eventbrite. Load-Date: September 12, 2023  End of Document
