   Del Brexit al 'Regrexit' CE Noticias Financieras English August 6, 2023 Sunday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1149 words Body   What is given is not taken away, say the supporters of Brexit. It is never too late to ask for forgiveness and backtrack, respond those who consider that the decision to leave the European Union has been a shot in the foot, one of the biggest mistakes in British history along with the Suez debacle. In politics there is no such thing as repentance," said Santiago Carrillo, "you simply get it right or you get it wrong. Regret is outdated, the only thing that consoles is pleasure, said Oscar Wilde. In any case, what is certain is that now, seven years after the referendum, most Britons regret Brexit, even if it does them no good. Some 57% admit that it was a mistake and 51% say that, if asked again, they would vote to reverse the decision and humbly ask the EU for the return of the prodigal son (it is another matter whether the EU-27 would be willing, and even less so with the advantages that the UK had in 2016, such as not being in the euro, nor in Schengen, and the return of the agricultural check). Only for 10 % the Brexit is a priority; what concerns more is the economy, health and immigration Despite this, both Brexit and Regrexit - which in Spanish sounds like "return" and in English like "regret" - are taboo words in Great Britain. In the United States there is Trump in the soup (they hardly talk about anything else), but here the return to Europe is a taboo subject, as if among politicians and even families a kind of Sicilian omertà had been subscribed. The Conservatives want nothing to do with it, because it has been an unmitigated disaster. Labour doesn't either, because between a quarter and a third of its voters were inclined to abandon the EU ship, and the party needs them to regain power. And as for the people, they think it is too early to reverse a democratic decision, and prefer not to reopen wounds that pitted parents against children and friends against friends, and has even given rise to dating apps of like-minded political people. What worries most is the cost of living, inflation and the deterioration of public health care. So is there any chance of the UK applying to return to the EU in the foreseeable future? "It depends on what you think of it as such," says analyst Tracey Simon. Not in ten years, the minimum would be sixteen or seventeen. The likelihood is that Labour will win the next election. A referendum can be ruled out, because it is not going to be part of their platform. But it is feasible that he will prepare the ground to raise the issue if things go well for him and he gets a second term (he has already hinted at giving the vote to European citizens). If he were to say yes, the clock would start ticking and, in the most optimistic scenario, even on the fast track, it would be a decade-long process until the return becomes a reality." The closest scenario for a new referendum is if Labour wins the next two elections Which Europe this country would return to is another question, because it is possible that Ukraine, Serbia, Bosnia Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania and even Turkey would then be part of the EU, or would be completing accession procedures. But it is also not unreasonable that in 2040 both continental partners and the British themselves will be more concerned about immigration, climate disaster and other pressing problems than about reversing Brexit. Especially when it seems to have served as a vaccine, and has made the French, Italians and Dutch see the wolf's ears and diluted the prospect of a Frexit and an Italiexit. Not surprisingly, 57% of people (and 75% of 18-24 year olds) say that slamming the EU door was the wrong decision. Its consequences include a loss of four GDP points and (EURO)650 million in forgone foreign investment, the highest inflation of the G7 countries (7.9%), and a cumulative additional cost of food of (EURO)6 billion from 2020. For Labour and Conservatives it is a taboo subject for fear of offending those who voted for Brexit. Experts always said that leaving the world's largest single market was economically absurd, and so it has proved. Bilateral trade between the UK and the EU (some (EURO)650 billion a year) has suffered a 25% drop in both directions. The bureaucracy to export and import is overwhelming, and shipping each shipment - regardless of weight and volume - costs £41 (about (EURO)46), an amount that can be borne by large companies but kills small ones. The end of freedom of movement has not reduced immigration, quite the opposite (606,000 people last year, mostly from former Commonwealth colonies). But the absence of young Europeans working in hospitality and the countryside has created a labor hole in those sectors. British students have been excluded from Erasmus scholarships and scientists from the Horizon program. Music groups have enormous problems performing on the continent because tours often exceed the maximum number of days allowed to stay without a work permit and because of obstacles to traveling in a coach with British license plates. The credentials of professionals such as accountants, doctors and lawyers are not automatically recognized in Europe, and they have to undergo examinations and have their qualifications validated in order to work. Tourism has not recovered to pre-Brexit levels, with the abolition of the 20% VAT refund to foreign visitors for purchases in this country, however much department stores such as Harrods have complained. For luxury goods, Paris or Barcelona have become more profitable options. Eurosceptics fear that, once in power, Labour will pave the way for a return to the EU. If Labour's Keir Starmer is the next prime minister, he will be in charge of the Brexit review scheduled for 2025. And although his official position is not to even contemplate a return to the single market or customs union, Euroskeptics are convinced that he will pave the way for it, blaming the economic problems on the EU exit and proceeding with a progressive regulatory alignment, which from the outset was Brussels' proposal to minimize the damage of the divorce (London, under pressure from business, has just given up issuing its version of the CE marking, the certificate attesting that products sold within the eurozone meet health and safety requirements). Such convergence would ease the decline of the City, which has seen the flight of thousands of jobs and a billion and a half euros to Paris, Amsterdam, Frankfurt and Milan because of the lack of equivalence in financial services. It is said that it is better to regret having done something than not having done it, and that it is never too late to backtrack. "I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance" (Gospel according to St. Luke). The British already recognize the mistake of Brexit and are paying penance. But it is another thing if they are willing to do something about it. For only 10% it is a priority issue. Load-Date: August 7, 2023  End of Document
