   Dermot Desmond's Latvian Bank warns seizing Russian assets may spark tit-for-tat reaction Sunday Independent January 7, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS;NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 1145 words Byline: Richard Curran Body   A Dermot Desmond-backed bank in Latvia is worried about the consequences of its government nationalising a particular building in the capital city of Riga, because of the property's perceived links to Moscow. Rietumu Bank, in which Desmond owns a 33.1pc stake, wrote to the Latvian parliament to express concerns about whether the nationalisation of the building would lead to tit-for-tat asset seizures in Russia and its ally Belarus. The problem for Rietumu is that while it stopped lending in the Russian and Belarus markets before Putin's invasion of Ukraine in 2022, it had legacy financial commitments there. The Latvian government is very concerned about a particular building in downtown Riga referred to as 'Moscow House', where it says activities have taken place indicating support for Russia's aggressive policy in Ukraine. The government decided before Christmas to nationalise the building using a new piece of legislation. While Rietumu is fully supportive of the Latvian government's stance on Russia, its chairwoman, Jelena Buraja, wrote to the parliament expressing concerns that the move might give Russia an excuse to take identical action against Latvian businesses. In a letter to the parliament reported by Latvian public radio, Buraja said she fully understood the takeover of the so-called Moscow House into state ownership as symbolic and showing solidarity with Ukraine and its fight against an aggressor. However, a review of Rietumu in 2022 showed a risk position with the Russian market of (EURO)129m and a further (EURO)18m with Belarus. These exposures were in the form of loans committed to clients prior to the war. But Rietumu has not been able to terminate these commitments because Russia has restricted transfers of funds to Rietumu bank accounts. Rietumu is one of Latvia's most important business lenders and it made profits of (EURO)12.7m in the nine months to September 2023. Its balance sheet remains very strong with assets of (EURO)1.4bn, customer deposits of (EURO)924m and capital and reserves of (EURO)354m. While the issue of a single building in Latvia has become very political for the former Soviet state, elsewhere the mood in the West is hardening towards the seizure of around $300bn of Russian money which has already been frozen. It comes as some people have expressed concern that the West could harm itself with seizures of frozen Russian assets. One history professor from Cornell University in the US, writing last week in the Financial Times, questioned whether the US had a watertight legal basis for confiscating frozen Russian assets, as the US and its allies are not openly at war with Moscow. It is one thing to have assets frozen in tit-for-tat economic conflict but another to have them confiscated. Rietumu could take a financial hit in the crossfire. Jeffrey Donaldson is not quite 'our man in Cairo' The tangled web of economics, politics, populism and protocols that makes up the complex narrative of Northern Ireland's political life is always rich with irony. As DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson tries to orchestrate a return to Stormont while retaining as much party support as possible, one small issue illustrates the point - live exports of cattle. Just hours after the Brexit referendum result was announced in June 2016, Donaldson did a interview with RTÉ Radio's Richard Crowley. Asked what the Brexit referendum outcome would do for Northern Ireland's economy, the DUP grandee immediately replied by suggesting that at least the UK would not conduct a referendum re-run, as had happened south of the Border in the past. It was a clumsy sidestep from the lack of an obvious answer to the question. Some time later, while discussing Brexit on radio with Donaldson, I suggested that a hard Brexit would be bad news for the Northern economy and for Northern farmers in particular. When pressed about opportunities for the regional economy, Donaldson reached for an unusual example. He said Brexit would facilitate opportunities for Northern farmers to export live cattle to places like Egypt. And he even namechecked Egypt in particular. Not exactly a compelling economic plan to counter what looked at the time like the loss of full access to a 500 million-strong single EU market. Since then, the Northern Ireland Protocol has provided some potential to alleviate the economic damage of a hard Brexit - but what ever happened to those opportunities for live cattle exports? Donaldson hasn't exactly become a version of "our man in Cairo". Before Christmas King Charles announced the British government's intention to legislate this year for the prevention of live animal exports to anywhere, as the UK government tries to position itself as a leader in animal welfare. Donaldson's Egyptian opportunity was gone... but not quite. Because of the all-island agrieconomy and the protocol, Northern Ireland is not covered by the proposed new live export ban. So technically it is free to export cattle to Egypt - so long as EU animal welfare standards are met. But there is just one problem. Northern Ireland isn't exporting any cattle to Egypt. And neither are we. Despite allowing for a re-opening of that market in 2016, we still haven't exported any live cattle there, not since they were blocked due to BSE in 1997. Probably just as well too, as live exports are not a pleasant business. Meanwhile, the British are to finally introduce animal and plant import checks as they arrive in Britain from the EU. This will apply to Irish exporters into Britain. Additional paperwork will be required from the end of January, and later in the year physical checks are due to take place. The move has been postponed five times since the EU trade deal was signed. We will have to see whether it happens this time or not. Professor says AI wonks will reap what they sow If you are thinking of steering your little bright spark son or daughter into Stem subjects such as coding or engineering, you should perhaps think again. That is according to Christopher Pissarides, winner of the Nobel Prize for Economics in 2010. He believes that developments in artificial intelligence mean certain IT jobs are "sowing the seeds of their own self-destruction". He believes AI will eventually take the same jobs in the future. But don't worry. Pissarides, who is a labour market expert, believes "empathetic" and "creative" skills may thrive in a world dominated by AI. He is actually an optimist about the impact AI will have on the labour market over time. He says the jobs that will remain in high demand are in things such as hospitality, healthcare and communications. There is one fly in the ointment. These jobs are often lower paid than Stem-backed careers. The London School of Economics professor may even be accused of taking the 'pissarides' when he said: "They're better than the jobs that school leavers used do." So that's all OK then! Graphic    Dermot 'The Kaiser' Desmond owns a 33.1pc stake in Rietumu Bank of Latvia Load-Date: January 7, 2024  End of Document
