   Despite the DUP's Trumpian claims, this deal has embedded the sea border rather than removed it; Comment A party whose crest is a lion has lurched through the last eight years like a lost lamb. It has altered the Union but can't admit it Belfast Telegraph February 3, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 1894 words Byline: Sam McBride Body   S O long, winding and wearisome has the road from Brexit been that it is easy to lose sight of where we've been and where we're going. The events of recent years have involved a devastating exposure of Britain's weakness. They have also shown unionists in Northern Ireland how little their concerns really matter to most of the powerful in London. But unionists aren't even close to being blameless, repeatedly electing DUP figures who have alternated between swaggering and bungling. A party whose crest is a proud lion has lurched through the last eight years like a directionless lamb. The DUP knows it has failed but seems to have calculated that such an admission is too risky, so it is now pretending that defeat is victory. From the outset, the complexity of Brexit has clothed many embarrassing facts in seemingly elaborate garments. But in time, many of those clothes have fallen away. The difficulty in moving individual products - sausages, plants, steel, or any number of esoteric examples - across the Irish Sea involves tangible examples of what has changed. But what is intangible can be lost, even if it signifies a far more profound shift. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson's deal with the Government is being trumpeted by the DUP and denounced by more hardline unionists. Both have a point. This outcome is better practically for Northern Ireland, and more constitutionally bearable for unionists, than the original Northern Ireland Protocol. If goodwill persists between Brussels and London, and if blind eyes are turned liberally to continued bureaucratic absurdities, then what has happened this week can work, after a fashion. That should improve the lives of everyone, regardless of their politics, in small but practical ways such as increased consumer choice, and lower prices due to greater competition. But while the Irish Sea border has been softened, it unquestionably remains. For Jeffrey Donaldson to claim he's swept away the sea border for goods which are staying in NI is as palpably absurd as Trump claiming he won the last US Presidential election. Confidently asserting something doesn't make it true. Donaldson should try moving a cherry tree from Leeds to Lisburn, or try moving any other commercial item between Birmingham and Ballymena on the same basis as Birmingham to Brighton. Donaldson knows the border remains because the deal - confirming what this column reported last week - includes a plan for Whitehall to "take direct powers at Westminster to direct NI bodies" in relation to checks on goods. The DUP is happy to wash its hands of these checks, and perhaps blame Westminster for them in future, but it has agreed to this in the knowledge of what that means. The deal also involves the quiet continuation of the European Court of Justice's jurisdiction over Northern Ireland. Sir Jeffrey had said this was "not acceptable" and insisted it was covered by the fourth of his 'seven tests' by which to judge if the sea border had gone. The DUP spoke of those seven tests with a quasi-religious fervour. They were written on tablets of stone in Dundela Avenue, but then at various points, the party would add to them or interpret them even more broadly than their original text. Yet they have now been suddenly cast aside. Former leader Arlene Foster this week wrote that "the seven tests were not sacrosanct" and Donaldson tweeted her article. The DUP leader has done nothing to prepare his supporters for what he has now done. Just three months ago, former senior DUP adviser Lee Reynolds wrote that the Windsor Framework "was and is unworkable", describing it as a "s**t sandwich". He said: "Donaldson may have capital to spend but he will not buy nor try to sell a halfbaked half loaf and instead wait for Labour." If that's what a former DUP strategist expected, it's not hard to understand why some DUP supporters are stunned by this week's events. This is the Windsor Framework in drag. Even Downing Street admitted that the deal changed the framework's operation but not its "fundamentals". David Cameron and Maros Sefcovic said this week that they have a "shared commitment to the full implementation of the Windsor Framework". How could something which last week was unconscionable now be something Donaldson talks about with apostolic zeal? The DUP's position has been so confusing that Donaldson might be forgiven for being confused by it. But he's not alone. DUP deputy leader Gavin Robinson this week said something which suggests a stark lack of understanding of the basics of the Irish Sea border. One of this deal's elements is to rename the GB-NI 'green lane' - which is meant to involve minimal bureaucracy for goods staying in Northern Ireland - the 'UK Internal Market Lane'. But that still leaves the red lane for goods at risk of going to the Republic. Many raw materials will still be in the red lane as will mixed loads. Robinson said this week that the DUP had "never taken issue" with a barrier in the Irish Sea for goods that were at risk of entering the EU. History shows that's not the case. Anything sold at a supermarket in Newry is obviously at risk of moving to Dundalk. Never did the DUP suggest that meant everything in the supermarket was OK to be checked. If this agreement lives up to the Government's claims, it will mean zero checks in the green lane, down from 5% in the Windsor Framework. But that can only happen if the EU agree - which isn't yet clear. That fact makes clear that this remains a jointly-administered border; the UK cannot simply do as it likes without inviting retaliatory EU action which it isn't prepared to countenance. It would be unwise to take Government claims at face value because every deal on the sea border has involved either outrightly dishonest or deeply misleading Government statements. The Windsor Framework claimed to disapply "over 1,700 pages of EU law" but to this day the Government can't coherently demonstrate that. This deal claims that "more than 80% of all freight movements" will travel through the renamed green lane. When asked for the calculations behind that figure, the Government said it "will provide further details in due course". For now, we are still in the constructive ambiguity phase of this deal. But as Alex Kane has observed of the Good Friday Agreement, eventually that must give way to destructive clarity. As BBC NI's peerless Brexit expert John Campbell said, most of the easements now being talked about have come through the Windsor Framework, with "minor… but politically important" amendments now secured by the DUP. Some opponents of the protocol believe this makes it worse. They believed it was so unworkable that if ever fully implemented it would have imploded within days. They fear that the DUP has managed to take something unworkable and take off enough of the harshest edges in a way that might work, without undoing the fundamental change in Northern Ireland's status. But the DUP has belatedly come to realise how few friends it has in London. This is far deeper than the current leadership of unionism. Margaret Thatcher's biographer, Charles Moore, observed that unlike William Gladstone who in 1888 proclaimed "my mission is to pacify Ireland", Mrs Thatcher never entertained such a grandiose idea. Instead, Moore wrote, "for her, the subject of Northern Ireland was always a distraction from her great task of restoring British economic liberty and success". In a contemporaneous private note of a conversation with the then Prime Minister over dinner days after she'd signed the Anglo-Irish Agreement in 1985, Moore recorded that she had referred to matters in Northern Ireland as "foreign affairs". If the prime minister who gave birth to the 'as British as Finchley' phrase privately saw Northern Ireland as in some way "foreign", it's easy to see how more than three decades later it wasn't such a great stretch for many in power in London to accept a trade border with Northern Ireland. Rather than counter this with diplomacy, unionism has retreated inwards. Donaldson is a natural diplomat, but he leads a most undiplomatic party which often revels in being disliked. It has often behaved gratuitously. Ian Paisley Jr's boast that his party had "done over" Leo Varadkar at an earlier stage of the Brexit negotiations didn't emerge as a leaked conversation, but in a press release issued by the North Antrim MP. But while focussing on playground insults, many in the DUP were blinded to reality by their own hubris. It's true that the Government and the Civil Service have put immense work into attempting to resolve this problem. For some in Whitehall, that has been a ruse to get the entire UK more closely aligned to the EU. And even some of what unionists appear to have gained in the deal isn't what it seems. The Government recants on its past commitments to the EU to promote the all-island economy. But this means far less than it seems. The continuation of even a softened sea border is infinitely more important in shaping the economic landscape than words on a page. More than that, the Department for the Economy is devolved, so the views of a Government which is in its final months are of little substantive significance. Some nationalists are understandably annoyed at some of this distinctly pro-Union language. But on the substance, there has been far less movement, which is why Sinn Féin has been relaxed about this since being shown it in December. When studied, the deal is riven with contradictions. As legal academic Colin Murray observed, the command paper (a grand description of a long Government press release with no legal effect) claims that Parliament is sovereign and so can do as it pleases, but a few pages later it gives a commitment to bind future parliaments, preventing them from striking trade deals which harden the Irish Sea border. If Parliament is sovereign, as indeed it is, then a future parliament could simply sweep away this provision. This deal has emerged from what in South Africa was referred to as "consensus by exhaustion" - leaving disputatious parties in a room until they were sufficiently worn down to reach agreement. The Government and the DUP hope - and might be right - that this deal might be unloved but a weary unionist public is ready to accept it. In many ways, the greatest threat to the deal is the DUP's misinformation about it. People might accept they've partly lost, but they won't like to be told they've won only to later find out that's wrong. The DUP has veered between tacitly admitting that it hasn't got all it demanded and claiming this as a triumphant victory. The party's social media account posted claims which could only have been more triumphalist if set to rousing military music. "REMOVED checks for goods moving within the UK," read one Trumpian message, hiding from voters that a host of checks for goods will remain, along with the far more significant paperwork. The DUP knows the true position is very different. The Union they loved has gone, and it's unlikely to return. That doesn't mean the Union's over, but it will be different - different in a way they didn't foresee, and don't want, but might never be able to change - and which they brought on themselves. 'Brexit has clothed many embarrassing facts in seemingly elaborate garments... many of those clothes have fallen away' 'But the DUP has belatedly come to realise how few friends it has in London' Graphic    Consensus by exhaustion: Sir Jeffrey Donaldson and Secretary of State for NI Chris Heaton- Harris CHARLES MCQUILLAN/GETTY Load-Date: February 3, 2024  End of Document
