   Documentary revealing the true cost of Brexit to UK Liverpool Echo September 16, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 16,17 Length: 315 words Body   LAURA Kuenssberg's new documentary on the architects and characters behind Brexit showcasing their Machiavellian dealings to initiate what has clearly become a failed experiment casts an illuminating insight into the current debacle that is British politics. Listening to Jacob Rees Mogg is chilling as there is no acknowledgment that the obvious damage caused by Brexit far outweighs any perceived advantage. The whole Brexit movement was sold on the milk and honey promise that the British people could forge a new identity as world leaders in trade and commerce where everyone would benefit when the truth is that it was sold on lies and false dreams. Tory speculators and hedge fund investors are the only ones that have profited, and profited greatly. Johnson was only courted by Brexiteers because present day politics is more personality rating than substance and for some reason, which many including myself find baffling he was very popular with Middle England and undoubtedly swayed the vote. As was always destined his character revealed itself with a bang. These people are charged with looking after the interests of the people they represent and this programme's first episode is a fascinating insight into just how hell bent these self serving liars were. As the series progresses I look forward to seeing the explanations of how the ineffectual Cameron was manipulated by the right of his party alongside Farage, a man who has never held political office in this country. Since the country is now in a state of complete free fall under Rishi Sunak, I wonder how many of these Tory ideologists will admit that Brexit has failed and consequently made a mess of everything else whilst at the same time adding millions to their own bank accounts. Instead they will go on blaming doctors, nurses, rail workers etc for not kowtowing to their disastrous self serving policies. Mike Walsh, Kirkby Graphic    The BBC's Laura Kuenssberg - see lead letter Load-Date: September 16, 2023  End of Document
