   EU judges order UK to pay £28m for Brexit breach The Daily Telegraph (London) September 29, 2023 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 312 words Byline: Joe Barnes Body   EUROPEAN judges have ordered the UK to pay a (EURO)32  million (£27.7million) ne over its failure to impose EU rules on diesel, in a ruling the Government fears could set a precedent for future rows over Brexit. The European Court of Justice (ECJ) imposed a penalty almost double that initially recommended by advisers to serve as a warning against further potential breaches of EU rules in Northern Ireland. It set the ne based on the size of the UK's economy rather than Northern Ireland's because that "would not be sufficiently dissuasive and therefore would not make it possible to achieve the aim of effectively preventing the repetition of similar infringements of EU law in the future". The Telegraph understands that senior government figures have warned the case sets a worrying precedent for future disputes over the province. Under the Windsor Framework, Northern Ireland is bound to swathes of EU rules for goods. Only commercial boats are allowed to use lower-taxed fuel. Private yachts, boats and canal boats must use white diesel, which attracts a higher rate of VAT. The initial legal case was opened against the UK in 2020, while the post-Brexit transition period was still in place. The ECJ said the rule had applied for the entire UK for almost three years since the original ruling, insisting that it could only apply to Northern Ireland because Brexit only entered into full force in January 2021. Brexiteers said the ruling was a sign that Brussels would continue to use Northern Ireland as leverage to stop Britain diverging from EU rules. The UK Government said: "This is ultimately a historic case which began at a time when the UK was a member of the EU. We have now left. Since then, we have negotiated the world's largest zero tariffs and zero quotas deal with the EU, and are now focused on using our Brexit freedoms to the benet of the British public." Load-Date: September 29, 2023  End of Document
