   Even Remainers are falling out of love with EU; As the anti-Brexit movement loses steam, the biggest divide is within the European Union The Daily Telegraph (London) October 4, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 23 Length: 1059 words Byline: AMBROSE EVANS-PRICHARD Body   If Brexit Britain has failed in economic terms, so has every one of the eurozone's large industrial states. All have lagged the world. We now have comprehensive data from the Oce for National Statistics on growth, business investment, and immigration. The picture refutes the Rejoiner catechism that the UK has fallen badly behind Western Europe, or paid an exorbitant price for sovereign independence, or that it has closed itself o  to skilled migration. Thanks to the tireless e  orts of Julian Jessop from the Institute of Economic A  airs, we can reconstruct the cumulative growth of GDP from mid-2016 to mid-2023. The data show that the UK and France are level-pegging at just over 8pc, with Germany at 5.5pc, and Italy at 5pc. Some eurozone states have yet to revise their gures fully, but the pattern is unlikely to change much. The US and Canada have done better but they are beneciaries of high oil and gas prices. They have not su  ered the same shock from Vladimir Putin's war. Furthermore, the US is running a scal de cit of New Deal proportions. The chickens will come home to roost next year as the US Treasury tries to roll over $8trillion (£6.6trillion) of debt in a saturated bond market. Nor has business investment in the UK done as badly as rst supposed. It is above its historical trend line in real terms, and 10pc above its pre-pandemic level. This blows up the scal assumptions of the Oce for Budget Responsibility (OBR). A supposed fall in investment is a key reason why it thinks that Brexit will cost the UK 4pc of GDP in the long run. The multilateral bodies - OECD, IMF, Davos nomenklatura - have played their part in misleading everybody. Year after year, they have issued forecasts understating the UK's likely growth, feeding a mood of pervasive negativism, in turn amplied by British, European, and US media headlines. And year after year, they have been wrong. They believed the myth that Brexit is chiey about keeping foreigners at bay, and this has caused a persistent analytical bias.Net immigration hit a record 606,000 last year, ve times higher than the base assumption made by the OECD and other academic modellers during the Project Fear era. The OECD argued in its Economic Consequences of Brexit, that the lion's share of Brexit damage would come from migration curbs, leading to "a smaller pool of skills" and a fall in "technical progress". The exact opposite is instead happening. Professor Jonathan Portes, of London's King's College, has pencilled a net gain from the Brexit e  ect of immigration, arguing that the UK now has a more open global regime for work visas than the EU. "I am more convinced than ever that the likely impact is positive. New migrants from outside the EU are performing well in the labour market. Their pay has overtaken the pay of both natives and EU migrants," he said. It will take time to clear the false perceptions of Brexit but I think we are already past peak Bregret. Henceforth, we will be reminded of the eurozone's own woes as it tightens monetary and scal policy into the teeth of a deepening downturn, again exposing the toxic pathologies of a half-built currency union that still has no joint treasury, debt union, or proper banking union to back it up. It will revive the bitter and unresolved conict between northern creditors and southern debtors. It will again lead to the contractionary "doom loop" policies that are hardwired into the legal structure of the treaties. The UK's global trade deals are kicking in. It acceded to the Pacic-Latin American trade bloc (CPTPP) in July, after the Antipodean deals. Korea is ready to go. An accord with India may be agreed later in the year. The Gulf states are next in line. Even if Sir Keir Starmer wished to rejoin the EU single market - let alone the EU - he would have to pull the UK out of these trade deals. That is not his intention. His team is forging intimate ties with the Biden White House, hoping to revive the Transatlantic bonhomie of the Clinton-Blair era. It is taking tips on a British variant of the Ination Reduction Act. Labour is angling for a "worker-centric" trade arrangement with the US. Contrary to much Fleet Street agitation, Sir Keir did not reveal in Canada that he would cleave piously to the EU's regulatory Acquis. He said that Labour did not wish to "rip up" environmental or food standards, or worker rights, and that this creates "common ground" with the EU. He restated the blindingly obvious. So if the economic damage from Brexit has been greatly exaggerated - though undoubtedly disruptive for small exporters and specic niche sectors - the central indictment must rest on the political damage instead. But the war in Ukraine has demonstrated all too clearly that Nato, the G7, and the global alliance of liberal democracies are what count when push comes to shove. The most striking ssure is between resisters and appeasers within the EU. Most of the Danube Basin is fraternising with Putin. Just 40pc of Slovakians think that Russia is primarily responsible for the war. A higher number think the US is the greater security risk. Only 43pc of Austrians support the EU's policy on Ukraine, and it is scarcely di  erent in Italy, which is shocking when you reect on the likely fate of the European project if Russia's invasion had prevailed. These attitudes are far removed from the overwhelming sentiment of the British people. Which begs the question why the British Left and the metropolitan opinion elites think it so desirable to lock the UK into a tight political union with these countries. Let us assume that Labour is elected next year. Sir Keir may well face a centre-Right Europe moving yet further to the Right. A stable Labour Britain in this 1930s atmosphere would be a beacon to the Left-intelligentia in America and Europe alike, and it would surely start to feel that way to those who inhabit the mental universe of BBC Newsnight or The Guardian. Much of the pro-EU passion on the British Left has little to do with Europe itself. It is about where one stands in identity politics. Once their own political tribe is in power, facing a prickly Right-wing Europe, we can expect a convulsive ideological pivot. Maybe the Left will become the biggest champion of Brexit after all. 'Migrants from outside the EU are doing well, their pay has overtaken that of natives and EU workers' Load-Date: October 5, 2023  End of Document
