   Expats defy Brexit in 'little Britain of the Dordogne' The Times (London) October 14, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 21 Length: 626 words Byline: Adam Sage Body   When Britain left the European Union, Rose Peraud feared an exodus from her native Dordogne. "We were scared the British would all leave," she said, standing in the central square of Eymet, often described as the "most English of French towns". British expatriates have done much to boost flagging rural French economies over the years, although Peraud, who lives near Eymet, said she had been more concerned about the impact of Brexit on sport. She was worried that her local rugby club would lose its thriving British membership, but also that les britanniques would stop playing pétanque, which she said had become popular among those in the Dordogne. "They join a lot of associations and are well integrated. We would not have wanted to see them leave," said Peraud, 65, an international pétanque umpire. More than three years after Brexit, however, she is relieved to note that most of the Britons have stayed on. "We like having them here," she said. The British community in Eymet has recently become the subject of a documentary by Arte, the Franco-German television channel. Little Britain in the Dordogne features a British builder grumbling about the French habit of stopping work at midday and returning - drunk, he said - two hours later. Mostly, however, Franco-British relations in the Dordogne are smooth. John, 84, who moved to the Dordogne after trying Portugal, which he found too hot, and Normandy, which was too cold, said: "If you make the effort to speak French, even if you are not fluent, and you address people with a smile, you will find it reciprocated." He said his children wanted him and his wife to return to Britain, but he prefers the weather, the healthcare and the lifestyle in the Dordogne. "Britain has changed so much I don't recognise it." Sara Ghazali, 32, who runs La Mauvaise Herbe bookshop in Eymet, said she sold Anglophone books to her British customers, but French works too. She said many wanted to improve their French after applying for French citizenship following Brexit - passing a language test being a requirement. Brexit has had an impact on British second-home owners, many of whom have sold up following the realisation that they can now stay only 90 days out of 180 without a visa. The total number of Britons with second homes in France is about 60,000, compared with more than 93,000 a decade ago, according to British government figures. However, the picture is different for Britons with their main home in France. Most have stayed, according to French officials. In Eymet, for instance, 25 per cent of the population of about 2,600 is British, a proportion that has remained roughly stable. A similar pattern is visible across France, with 11,074 residency permits delivered to Britons last year, compared with 11,196 in 2018, according to the French interior minister. Jérôme Bétaille, the mayor of Eymet, said: "We like to say that in the market on Thursday, you hear more English than French." He said the council went out of its way to ensure a smooth integration for Britons, translating official documents into English and explaining France's often impenetrable planning laws. Browsing in an estate agent's window were Julie Barclay, 62, and Michael, 64, from Dundee. They are planning to move to the continent, probably to France, although possibly to Spain. "Brexit did make us hesitate, that and Covid," she said. "But I think we are going to do it regardless. I want to live somewhere pretty." Bruno de Saint-Exupéry, founder of Prestant, an estate agent, said that of his last 1,137 transactions, 145 involved British purchasers. He too said the figure indicated a continuing British demand for the "extraordinary quality of life" in the Dordogne, albeit on a slightly lower level than before Brexit. Load-Date: October 14, 2023  End of Document
