   Expat Brexit hardliners want Johnson to return i-news September 23, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12 Length: 304 words Byline: Graham Keeley Body   Many British expats living in Spain would prefer that the UK had not left the European Union, but some are proud Brexit supporters and remain convinced it was the right decision. Philip Smalley, 76, a retired pub owner from Preston, Lancashire, who has lived in Spain for 17 years, voted for Brexit and remains a fervent supporter of breaking away from the EU. "Closer trade ties with Europe is fine but anything that smacks of the EU interfering in British matters and dictating things from Brussels or Strasbourg is not on," he told i from his home in Viñuela, near Malaga. "Boris finally got Brexit done but he was smacked down by Covid and the Blob [the Civil Service] and the left-wing media. We still have a lot of things to do." As Labour proposes a closer relationship with the EU if it wins the next general election, Brexit supporters in Spain oppose any suggestion Britain should come under the control of Brussels again. "We were very aware of putting our country first, unlike people here who were worried about how it would affect them. We were concerned with the sovereignty of the UK," said Michael Stevenson, who lives in Alcaucin, near Malaga, and voted for Brexit along with his wife. "We will have the last laugh when Europe falls apart." Mr Stevenson, who has lived with his wife in Spain for 16 years and is originally from Wigan, Lancashire, said his family are residents in Spain so have not been affected by restrictions that mean Britons visiting the country can only stay up to 90 days within every 180. Britain's departure from the EU remains a divisive issue in the UK and among the 400,000 UK expatriates who live in Spain, the largest community of Britons outside the UK. Anne Fernandez, president of Brexpats in Spain, which represents 45,000 UK expats affected by Brexit, welcomed closer ties with Europe. Load-Date: September 23, 2023  End of Document
