   Far right generates criticism by proposing Germany's exit from the EU CE Noticias Financieras English January 23, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 463 words Body   Berlin, Jan 23 (EFE) - The co-chair of the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party, Alice Weidel, has come under fire after referring to the referendum that led to Brexit as "a model for Germany" in the event that the EU is not reformed with fewer powers for the European Commission and more for the member states. "Brexit is a welfare killer and not a success. That is known to any child on the island. A 'dexit' would hurt Germany more than brexit would hurt the UK," said MP Torsten Frei of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) commenting on the idea formulated by Weidel in an interview with the "Financial Times". In the interview, Weidel says that the AfD will fight for a reform of the EU by eliminating what she considers democratic "deficits" such as the power held by the European Commission (EC) which she describes as "an unelected executive". "If that reform were not possible, if we cannot return sovereignty to the member states, then the citizens should decide the same as the UK and we would have a referendum on 'dexit'," she said. The brexit referendum, according to Weidel, can be a model for his country. In Germany a referendum on an exit from the EU is not constitutionally possible, but the AfD in its program proposes to open a way for it. "It is the right of every people to vote on staying in the EU, the monetary union and other supranational projects. It is a right that has been denied to us in Germany for decades by the parties in government," the program says. Such a reform would require a two-thirds majority in parliament, which AfD is far from, despite the fact that it is currently riding high in the polls, where it is in second place at the federal level, behind the conservative bloc formed by the CDU and the Bavarian Christian Social Union (CSU), which form a joint parliamentary group. State Secretary at the Ministry of Economics, Franziska Brantner, has warned that a 'dexit' would threaten the pillars of German welfare. "The AfD idea threatens the pillars of German welfare. The European market is basic to our economic success as an exporting nation," Brantner said. Liberal MP Mariae-Agnes Stark-Zimmermann also warns against the economic consequences of a dexit. "The AfD maintains its conviction of what is bad for Germany favors them as a party," she said on social network X. "Just as brexit was not a good idea, 'dexit' would be economic ruin for Germany," he added. The AfD's anti-EU stance is not new. Already at the last congress the party's leader in Thuringia, Björn Höcke, said that "the European Union has to die so that the real Europe can live." The supermarket chain Edeka joined in the criticism of AfD by showing in a video posted on social networks how empty the shelves would be without foreign products. EFE rz/cae/cg Load-Date: January 24, 2024  End of Document
