   Fears for river pollution as UK ditches EU rules on agriculture i-news December 23, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 15 Length: 984 words Byline: Lucie Heath Body   A Brexit law change is set to worsen the state of Britain's rivers as the Government ditches old European Union rules designed to protect waterways from agricultural pollution. From 1 January, British farmers will no longer be forced to comply with a series of EU regulations designed to promote good environmental practice, including rules to reduce agricultural run-off in to rivers. Campaigners have said it is a "weakening of environmental standards" in what is already "a very bad situation". While ministers insist these standards will be upheld through the Government's new post-Brexit agriculture regime, environmental groups warn of significant gaps that could lead to the further decline of Britain's nature and water courses. The post-Brexit regime, which is designed to reward farmers for protecting the environment, is currently being rolled out, with a limited number of farmers being able to access payments so far. The old EU system is in the process of being wound down and will come to a complete end in 2027. Lydia Collas, senior policy analyst at the Green Alliance, said: "Given we're already in a very bad situation, why are we losing things… we have this massive problem with water quality, and we're regressing from the position that we're in." Agriculture is one of the largest sources of pollution in Britain's rivers due to nutrient-rich soil, along with fertilisers and pesticides, being washed off in to water bodies when it rains. Intensive farming within river catchment areas has led to a massive decline in aquatic wildlife, as high nutrient levels in the water boost algae growth, restricting oxygen levels. Environmental groups fear that Britain's rivers could face further degradation due to the end of the EU rules, known as crosscompliance, which UK farmers have been forced to adhere to in order to receive subsidies through the EU's Common Agricultural Policy. While many of the crosscompliance regulations already exist in UK domestic law, environmentalists point to three significant gaps that will exist in Britain's regulatory regime for farmers once the EU rules come to an end at the start of 2024. Most crucially for rivers is a rule that forces farmers to create buffer strips to separate agricultural land from water bodies, thus reducing the risk of run-off. Some rules to prevent soil erosion will also come to an end, such as the obligation on farmers to keep green cover, such as crops or grass, on their soil over winter to reduce the chance of it being blown into rivers. A more basic obligation, to "take reasonable precautions" to prevent soil erosion, exists within UK regulations. The final regulatory gap concerns regulations around hedgerows. While less directly connected to river health, environmental groups say these rules are essential, as hedgerows are an important habitat for wildlife and have potential to store high amounts of carbon. "Farmers want to do the right thing generally, but if the Government isn't incentivising this, then it does mean the system's stacked against having these protections," said Hannah Blitzer, a senior policy officer at Wildlife and Countryside Link. Philip Carson, of the Nature Friendly Farming Network, said the regulatory gaps meant the Government was at risk of paying farmers to do things that "everyone should be doing anyway as part of good practice". He added that Brexit provided the Government with the perfect opportunity to reform the system, which he said is currently "piecemeal". In 2018, ministers beefed up regulations around agriculture and water quality through the introduction of the Farming Rules for Water, but Ms Blitzer said these rules are poorly enforced and more ambition is needed. Without stronger regulation, she said the Government will fail to hit its legally binding environmental targets, including its pledge to halt the decline of nature by 2030 and reduce "diffuse pollution", which includes agricultural run-off, by 40 per cent by 2038. A spokesman for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: "We have consulted on continuing hedgerow protections after the end of cross-compliance and will publish… our next steps shortly. "We are committed to protecting watercourses as set out in the Farming Rules for Water. We are working with regulators to implement a more preventative, advice-led approach to monitoring and enforcement. Since 2021, the Environment Agency has undertaken more than 7,000 farm inspections resulting in over 11,400 improvement actions." Brexit switch EU and UK rules for farmers Agriculture is a major cause of pollution, affecting more than 60 per cent of England's failing rivers, according to a recent research paper by the House of Commons. Environmental groups have supported the Government's decision to move away from the EU's Common Agricultural Policy, as it rewards farmers based on size of land and has been criticised for promoting unsustainable forms of farming. But they remain concerned about gaps in the regulation. The Government is currently transitioning towards its own farming subsidy system, called the Environmental Land Management Scheme (ELMS), which instead rewards farmers for work to protect nature and boost food security. Through this scheme, farmers can access money to carry out work to improve water quality in their surrounding area, such as by improving their soil health or the storage of slurry, a natural fertiliser made from manure. But while nature groups back the move in theory, they say many farmers are struggling to access these schemes after Brexit and that the projects must be underpinned by strong regulation. "It is necessary that we switch from the direct payments to [ELMS], but we do need effective regulations to protect the environment and effectively level the playing field. Not every farmer is going to be involved in ELMS," said Hannah Blitzer (inset), of Wildlife and Countryside Link. Load-Date: December 23, 2023  End of Document
