   Game could be off the menu as Brexit keeps pluckers away The Times (London) October 14, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 39 Length: 456 words Byline: Will Humphries Body   A shortage of pluckers means that pheasant and other wild game could disappear from Britain's supermarket shelves. Game dealers, butchers and chefs say the birds are becoming more expensive to process because of a lack of skilled pluckers in the country. There has been a dramatic drop in the number of seasonal European workers coming to work in game processing jobs in Britain since Brexit and the devaluation of the pound. Leon Challis-Davies, culinary director of Eat Wild, the game meat marketing brand, said processors in the north of the country found it slightly easier to find British workers but southern workers and younger generations were not interested. "European labour is not coming back after Brexit and the younger generation of labour in our country don't want to roll their sleeves up and get stuck into manual labour," he said. Countryside groups want the government to increase the number of seasonal worker visas and their duration to make working in the UK more attractive. Steve Frampton, managing director of Wild and Game, an online meat retailer, said: "One of our suppliers recruited the majority of staff from Latvia but with Brexit the number has dropped by about 70 per cent, giving them serious staffing issues. "This has caused issues with supply and an increase in the cost of game meat. Many game processors are located in rural areas where there is limited availability of potential staff. The previous availability of seasonal workers from Europe was ideal for their needs." About 55 million pheasants and red-legged partridges and 2.6 million mallard ducks are reared annually in captivity before being released into the British countryside to be shot for sport. If the shot birds cannot be processed for the food industry they face being buried in pits or exported. The government estimates that between 50,000 and 60,000 seasonal workers are needed annually to bring in the wider harvest across the UK, and they are almost entirely recruited from outside the country. Many of these workers are recruited via the Seasonal Worker Visa scheme, a temporary migration programme introduced in 2019 to alleviate post-Brexit labour shortages caused by the end to free movement of EU workers. The scheme initially had a quota of 2,500 places per year, but this year the quota is 45,000 to 55,000. Visa holders are not allowed to remain in the UK long term, claim benefits or bring families. The government's independent Migration Advisory Committee and the House of Lords horticulture sector committee are holding inquiries into the seasonal worker scheme. The Department for Environment commissioned an independent review of labour shortages in the food supply chain, and is supposed to report its findings in 2023. Load-Date: October 14, 2023  End of Document
