   Gibraltar faces elections and fears that the winner will be Spanish sovereignty CE Noticias Financieras English October 12, 2023 Thursday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1849 words Body    However small they may be, percentages in politics can have tremendous consequences. It happened in the United Kingdom with the Brexit referendum, in Spain with the last general election and it could happen this Thursday with the Gibraltar elections. A difference of just 0.53% could be key for the GBC Conservatives, led by Keith Azopardi, to snatch power from the GSLP-GLP alliance led by Fabian Picardo, thus putting an end to 12 years of socialist government. And that 0.53% is also of great relevance for Madrid in the context of the Brexit negotiations, by allowing it to play its cards differently on the question of sovereignty. This is at least the "great concern" that exists in the Rock, according to sources consulted by El Confidencial.  Not that Azopardi's position is different from that of Picardo. Both want a common area between the Rock - in limbo since 2016 - and the Schengen area that eliminates controls at the border with Spain, the only land border, along with that of Ireland, that now links the United Kingdom with the community bloc. But, according to sources consulted, the Conservative leader has neither the mastery on the matter nor the personal contacts treasured by Picardo in this last decade. "Who knows Azopardi in London itself?" they ask. They fear that the change of interlocutor at a crucial moment will be taken advantage of by Spain to "try to put new loopholes" both in sovereignty matters and in other technical issues, such as the arrangement for the importation of goods.  The general feeling is that Picardo would already know "all the tricks", while Azopardi could get "a big goal". Not only in the Brexit deal, but also in the talks on a possible military cooperation pact between London and Madrid that would involve the naval base on the Rock. Azopardi reproaches the Socialists for not involving him in the current details of the talks. And this is precisely the point that Picardo raises to ask for the vote, claiming that only he knows from the beginning the ins and outs of these negotiations on a Brexit that never wanted the vast majority of the Yankees.  It was last September 12 when Picardo announced the dissolution of Parliament and the convocation of elections for this Thursday, coinciding with Columbus Day. The appointment with the polls was scheduled for the last quarter of this year and the socialist leader, who has ruled the Rock since 2011, did not want to extend the calendar. His intention was to get a renewed mandate while Spain decides who to put in the Moncloa, a situation that could drag on until the beginning of next year.  However, beyond the post-Brexit negotiations, the pandemic, the problems in primary health care and the delays in the construction of public housing have been wearing down the Socialist leader. The polls are extremely close. After the withdrawal of Together Gibraltar, a left-wing party, and only with the independent Robert Vásquez as an alternative, the two-party system is once again becoming the protagonist. The scenario is so uncertain that the appointment with the polls this Thursday could be decided by just a handful of votes among the barely 24,682 Gibraltarians who are called to the polls.  Earlier this year, for a moment, it was thought that the announcement of white smoke for a post-Brexit agreement on Gibraltar would be immediate. After, in February, London and Brussels managed to put an end to the controversy over the Northern Ireland Protocol. Given the complexities that this entailed for a territory of difficult coexistence between Catholics and Protestants, it was thought that the necessary momentum would be achieved to resolve the issue of the Rock, a priori easier. But the negotiations ended up running aground and the elections in the Rock and Spain have left them at a standstill. Political paralysis benefits no one.  The Brexit forces Madrid and the Rock to find a pragmatic solution of coexistence. Around 30,000 people cross the fence every day. Among them, 15,000 workers, of which 10,000 are Spaniards from an area such as Campo de Gibraltar where unemployment rarely drops below 30%.  On New Year's Eve 2020, a few hours before the end of the Brexit transition period, London and Madrid managed to reach an agreement in extremis to avoid strict border controls. The text contained the guidelines to close a treaty between the European Commission and the United Kingdom on the Rock. But it is only a temporary solution that can be rescinded at any time and that could have a different course depending on whether the PP or the PSOE finally governs in Spain.  If flexibility at the fence is desired, the Schengen border must be outsourced to the port and airport of the Rock. But that requires the presence of agents from Spain (Schengen member). And therein lies the crux of the matter. Especially considering that the land where the airport is built was not contemplated in the Treaty of Utrecht (1713-1715). The British took it over in the 19th century, when epidemics forced the population to move to the isthmus.  What has been proposed is that Frontex, the European Union's Border and Coast Guard Agency - with which, by the way, the United Kingdom signed a preliminary working arrangement this very week - will carry out the checks during a four-year transition period, after which Spanish officials will take over. But for the Gibraltarians, the idea of "Spanish boots on the ground" is a deep red line, harking back to the days of the Franco regime, when the border was closed in 1969, leaving many families divided.  The negotiations speak of "a zone of shared prosperity", a euphemism to avoid talking about sovereignty over the British colony. But it is sovereignty, after all, which has marked the context of the last 300 years and which now hinders the longed-for agreement. Nobody wants to close a fence that would shake both the economy of the Rock and the surrounding Spanish regions. But, at the same time, nobody wants to sign a term, a point or a comma that could affect the issue of sovereignty in an international treaty.  In this context, beyond the Frontex issue, what would be hindering progress is the regulatory framework on the airport issue. Simple things such as, for example, applying EU or British regulations to wheelchairs made available to passengers could be seen as a ceding of sovereignty on both sides.  Last summer, Rock governor David Steel accused Spain of being responsible for the impasse by having asked for "a regulatory framework on the management of the airport that implies its Spanish jurisdiction," something he considers "intolerable." "In the 2020 New Year's Eve Framework Agreement, the sovereignty issue was dropped. Now Spain has reintroduced it," denounced the representative of the British Crown in Gibraltar to The Times.  On the other hand, another of the points that would be preventing progress would be the agreement on security and defense that Spain wants to close with the United Kingdom, with which military cooperation is now limited to the framework of the Atlantic Alliance, to which both countries belong. It is not that it is officially linked to the Brexit agreement, but, somehow, Madrid would have wanted to deal with it in parallel because of the interest it has on the Strait.  After the New Year's Eve Agreement, there was open talk about talks to reach a pact that would facilitate collaboration in the fight against jihadism, cyber defense or joint military missions. But the "confidence-building measures" over the naval base on the Rock have become a source of continuous friction and it is now difficult for those involved to speak publicly on this issue. "Spain wants the UK to have to consult it and ultimately give in to it."  The United Kingdom would be willing to close a defense agreement with Spain similar to the one it now has with Italy, France or Germany (cooperation, joint maneuvers, training, among others). But it seems more than complicated that, as a member of the Five Eyes, it would consider sharing intelligence. Likewise, it is not in favor of allowing Madrid any kind of joint use of the Gibraltar facilities. After years of not paying much attention to it, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has led the UK to reassess the Rock as a global hub for defense because of the importance of naval operations in the new geopolitical context. The Rock base represents an important intelligence-gathering point with interception of satellite communications, submarine cables and other electronic channels. It is also a valuable logistics base for fuel, ammunition and other supplies, and a possible ship repair yard.  Gibraltarian sources consulted point out that what Spain wants is for "the UK to limit its sovereign freedom of action in a region it considers, not without reason, vital for security and national interests." "Spain wants the UK to have to consult it and, ultimately, give in to it in order to be able to operate in the region," they point out. El Confidencial contacted the Spanish Foreign Ministry to corroborate this version, but has not yet received a response.  Defense experts consulted by this newspaper assure, however, that Spain "does not have the mass in the Strait to fully control it". They also point out that it would have to negotiate the space with Morocco and the interests of all the major powers that need to transit the region: the United States, the United Kingdom and France. To control the Strait, according to the analysts, Spain would need a much improved intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance system. And ships, submarines and aircraft for interdictions that cover the entire operational spectrum, in a sustainable manner. "Even if it could do that, it would always have to think about Moroccan reactions to any of its actions," they point out.  All in all, it does not look like the negotiations concerning the Rock are going to be resolved in the short term. In Brussels, there is interest in making progress. In any case, it wants to give its place to Spain which, as a member of the bloc, after the Brexit managed to get the EU to guarantee it veto capacity for any pact to be reached regarding the Rock. Likewise, Madrid got the EU to mention, for the first time, Gibraltar as a colony, thus joining the criterion maintained on the territory by the UN since 1967.  However small they may be, percentages in politics can have tremendous consequences. It happened in the United Kingdom with the Brexit referendum, in Spain with the last general elections and it can happen this Thursday with the elections in Gibraltar. A difference of just 0.53% could be key for the GBC Conservatives, led by Keith Azopardi, to snatch power from the GSLP-GLP alliance headed by Fabian Picardo, thus putting an end to 12 years of socialist government. And that 0.53% is also of great relevance for Madrid in the context of the Brexit negotiations, by allowing it to play its cards differently on the question of sovereignty. This is at least the "great concern" that exists in the Rock, according to sources consulted by El Confidencial.  Load-Date: October 13, 2023  End of Document
