   Half of people think leaving EU made Union weaker, 'Bregret' report finds The National (Scotland) October 21, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 586 words Byline: Judith Duffy Body   NEARLY half of people in the UK think leaving the EU has made the Union weaker, according to a new report focused on exploring -Bregret-. The survey found the figure for people who think it has impacted the Union was highest in Scotland and Northern Ireland at 61%, while in Wales it was 52% and England 47%. And when asked if they thought Brexit had gone badly, Scotland and Northern Ireland - which both voted to Remain in the EU - recorded a majority in agreement, at 66% and 62% respectively. But even in England and Wales, which both voted to Leave, that figure was around half. READ MORE: Call for elected SNP members to push for ceasefire in Middle East The report on -Exploring Bregret-, carried out by Public First and UK in a Changing Europe, also found voters feel negatively about the course that Brexit has taken so far. -Even among Leave voters, less than one in five feel that Brexit is going well, although most seem hesitant about making a definitive assessment,- it said. -The most common reasons people feel Brexit is going poorly are economic (increased prices, staff shortages, and a weaker economy more generally). -This is the case for both Remain and Leave voters.- One male voter in his 30s commented: -It-s like splitting up with your Mrs and then she-s very bitter about it - we-re not going into deals with you, we-re not doing this, we-re not doing this - It took that long to happen, the Brexit deal, by the time we-ve split up with them we-re in a one bed flat on our own and we haven-t got a clue what we-re gonna do.- Most voters were found to be pessimistic about the impact of Brexit in the long-term, with less than a third - 27% - of those surveyed thinking it will turn out well. READ MORE: Six more Labour officials in Edinburgh step down over party's Gaza stance A little more than six out of 10 Leave voters said they think it will, but this optimism was much less prevalent among those Leave voters who feel Brexit is going badly, at just 19%. However, the report found the vast majority of voters said they would vote the same way as they did in 2016, knowing what they do now. But Leave voters are more likely to have changed their mind - with 16% saying they would have voted differently compared to 6% of Remainers. However, when it comes to the idea of having another referendum, the reality is -complicated-, the report found. -The suggestion that the UK should hold another referendum is supported by a plurality of voters, but is divisive overall (44% support, 33% oppose),- it said. -The level of support is roughly the same as the overall support for rejoining the EU, which 46% of voters support and 32% oppose. -Among Leave voters, only 12% support rejoining, as opposed to 75% of Remain voters.- Commenting on the report, SNP MP and former MEP Alyn Smith (below) said: -Scotland never wanted to leave the EU, but we were dragged out anyway and forced to pay the cost by a Westminster government we didn-t vote for. We are still paying for it as food prices, fuel and mortgages remain sky-high. -The SNP are the only party that are prepared to right that wrong for Scotland and secure our return to the EU with independence. Comparable nations like Ireland, Denmark and Sweden are all wealthier and fairer than the UK - all are independent countries inside the EU. -Scotland has everything it needs to achieve that success including a wealth of natural and renewable energy resources - the only thing holding us back is Westminster, and the Brexit and austerity it has imposed on us.- Load-Date: October 22, 2023  End of Document
