   Here's an idea ... maybe the Tories should stand down in favour of Reform UK Mail on Sunday (London) January 5, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 19 Length: 860 words Byline: Richard Littlejohn Body   WHERE is it written that the Conservative Party has a divine right to rule? Or that Tory MPs are entitled to hold on to their seats, simply because the Labour alternative is too horrible to contemplate? Why, too, should Nigel Farage be expected to return to frontline politics following his successful foray into the jungle? But that's the narrative which the Westminster Bubble has seized upon following Reform UK's impressive election year launch this week. There was widespread disappointment over Farage's non-appearance at Wednesday's press conference thrown by the party of which he is honorary president. Reform is currently nudging 10 per cent in the polls and the Second (or is it Third or Fourth?) Coming of Farage would boost that share to 14 per cent. There's still no guarantee that the successor to the Brexit Party would win a single constituency. But it would split the Right-wing vote and could deprive at least 35 Tories of their seats ? and that has set alarm bells ringing at Conservative HQ. Tories have been queuing up to urge Reform to stand down candidates in the former Red Wall, which turned blue in 2019 and Labour is expected to win back this year. Conservative Party chairman Richard Holden (me neither) wailed that every vote for Reform was effectively a vote for Labour and would hand Starmer a landslide victory. But while Reform leader Richard Tice agrees that 'Starmergeddon' would be a disaster, he thinks the Tories are no better. Which is why he plans to field candidates in every constituency. THE insults being flung at Tice ? Tory deputy chairman Lee Anderson called him a 'pound shop Farage' yesterday ? only serve to show that the Conservatives are running scared. So they should be, after years of in-fighting, incompetence and squandering an 80-seat majority. When Tice argues that there's little difference between the two main 'socialist' parties, it's difficult to disagree. An allegedly Conservative Government has delivered the highest taxes in 70 years, a huge increase in legal and illegal immigration, five million people economically inactive, and a strikeridden public sector where nothing works properly and civil servants don't even turn up to the office more than three days a week. 'Starmergeddon' would be ten times worse, especially if the Labour leader's speech yesterday is anything to go by, which included a promise to introduce votes for schoolchildren aged 16 ? a cynical ruse to gerrymander a permanent socialist majority. And who is to say that a year into the next term, the Labour Left don't move against Starmer and install an Angela Rayner government, with a comeback for Jeremy Corbyn? After all, the Tories have dumped two prime ministers in the past couple of years without troubling the electorate. So Reform's low-tax, anti-woke manifesto, coupled with a pledge to slash immigration and scrap the net zero nonsense, is attractive to small-c conservative inclined voters ? even though under our current electoral system the party has no chance of forming a government. Don't forget that in 2015 Ukip hoovered up four million votes but ended up with just one MP. Yet Tice has ruled out an electoral pact with the Conservatives. And rightly so. In 2019, Farage generously stood down Brexit Party candidates to give the Tories a free run ? and Get Brexit Done. But Farage didn't get the peerage he deserved and although Brexit got done, after a fashion, other assurances made at the time were not honoured. So Tice is right to take a leaf out of the Pete Townshend songbook: Won't get fooled again. Which brings us to Nigel himself, fresh from his stint on I'm A Celebrity ? confounding the myth of Farage as a 'far-Right', swivel-eyed, xenophobic monster. According to the latest polls, his approval ratings are higher than Rishi Sunak. The Brexit Party is the only party this column has ever enthusiastically endorsed. With hindsight, the best outcome of the 2019 election would have been a Tory/Brexit coalition. Farage's Merry Men might have kept the Conservatives honest, forced them to stick to their manifesto and prevented them descending into a self-indulgent orgy of backstabbing and chaos. So much as I'd like to see Nigel back, I wouldn't blame him if he decided to sit things out. To be fair, what's in it for him? He's done his bit, far beyond the call of duty, enduring a torrent of personal and physical abuse in the process. His 60th birthday is coming up and he's entitled to enjoy the fruits of his labours. Time to earn a few bob. He's a natural broadcaster and his GB News show is going great guns. He'll also be in demand in the U.S. this year, as part of Donald Trump's Flying Circus. Yes, the prospect of a Labour landslide is too horrible to contemplate. But it seems inevitable, despite the electorate's lack of enthusiasm for the robotic, charisma-free yuman rites lawyer Starmer, who is far more Left-wing than he pretends to be right now. Yet must that mean Reform should withdraw candidates so that self-entitled Tory MPs, who have made such a pig's ear of the past few years, can keep their seats? Maybe a better idea would be for the Tories to stand down and give Reform a free run. Load-Date: January 5, 2024  End of Document
