   Hipkins on UK podcast gives China, Brexit views The New Zealand Herald September 26, 2023  Copyright 2023 The New Zealand Herald All Rights Reserved Section: GENERAL NEWS; Pg. A002 Length: 432 words Body   Labour leader and Prime Minister Chris Hipkins was frank that New Zealand's traditional security arrangements put New Zealand "at odds with China on a pretty regular basis".   Hipkins said that New Zealand had a strong trade relationship with China and the best way to approach the complicated relationship was to "be predictable".   He made the remarks to The Rest is Politics podcast, a popular British political podcast hosted by Alastair Campbell, known for the variety of communications roles he held under former UK Labour leader and Prime Minister Tony Blair, and former MP Rory Stewart, who served as a Cabinet Minister under former Prime Minister Theresa May. Stewart later stood for the leadership of the Conservative Party and therefore the role of Prime Minister when May resigned, but lost to Boris Johnson.   Hipkins spoke candidly of the moment just prior to becoming Prime Minister. As former Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern left Government House, having formerly resigned as Prime Minister, and he pulled up outside, ready to formally take on the role, she texted him to say: "Tag, you're it."   "If I was to describe the difference between being a Cabinet minister and being Prime Minister, I would say they are entirely different jobs," Hipkins said.   He said a former prime minister had told him that the job was "50 per cent ceremonial, and 50 per cent making the decisions that no one is willing to make".   "Almost every decision that lands on your desk - it's got there because no one else could or is willing to make that decision. Naturally, it's all the tough stuff that lands on the prime minister's desk," Hipkins said.   Hipkins recorded the podcast a few weeks ago, at what was roughly the beginning of the election campaign proper.   He confessed to being a Brexit sceptic, noting that he was "somewhat sceptical that Brexit is going to deliver anything near the benefits that were promised by those who campaigned for it. My guess it is is going to prove a costly exercise for the British people".   His critique of pro-Brexit campaigners is somewhat milder than other political leaders. Prior to the Brexit vote, Ardern, then just a second-term MP, tweeted that Boris Johnson was known as the "gaffe man".   Hipkins was very critical of New Zealand's three-year term, which he said was "absolutely crazy".   He said the problems with a three-year term were accentuated by the fact that MMP coalition governments tended to be slower to make decisions.   "I think you get bad governance decisions from a three-year term. I think four years would be about right," he said.       Load-Date: September 25, 2023  End of Document
