   How a DUP mole made a mockery of Sir Jeffrey Donaldson’s authority telegraph.co.uk January 30, 2024 Tuesday 2:01 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:3 Length: 1151 words Byline: By James Crisp, Europe Editor Highlight: Leader’s ‘secret’ speech live-tweeted at chaotic meeting before party agreed to end Stormont boycott Body   Standing before the PowerPoint presentation of the Government’s Brexit deal, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson’s heart must have sunk as the meeting of the DUP’s party executive descended into chaos. The wheels had already come off his carefully choreographed dance to sell a difficult offer from Rishi Sunak to end the DUP’s two-year boycott of the Northern Ireland Assembly.  The meeting on changes to the Irish Sea border was called at two hours’ notice and was meant to be held under the conditions of strictest secrecy. Instead, both the meeting and its location at the Larchfield estate in Co Down were promptly leaked. As the roughly 120 members arrived on Monday evening, they were greeted by about 50 loyalist protesters waving banners declaring “no surrender” and warning against a DUP “sellout”. It was a chilling reminder of how fiercely some unionists oppose Rishi Sunak’s Brexit deal for Northern Ireland , which the DUP boycott was meant to change. Sir Jeffrey did not need reminding of how deeply divided his party is on a return to Stormont and the post-Brexit border checks on GB goods and animals. A significant number of his voters see it as a stepping stone to tearing Ulster out of the Union and forcing it into a united Ireland. That view was shared by at least one member of the party executive gathered to hear Sir Jeffrey make the most important speech of his career as DUP leader. As Sir Jeffrey spoke, the mole passed details of the supposedly secret speech to influential loyalist activist Jamie Bryson, who promptly began live-tweeting the address. Meeting now halted. Anger that meeting is being live tweeted. 5/ Embarrassingly, he tweeted that Sir Jeffrey was complaining about how details of every meeting he holds end up in the media in less than an hour. It made a mockery of Sir Jeffrey’s authority and the DUP top brass’s demand for disciplined discretion and claims of party unity. Sir Jeffrey knows Mr Bryson well. They marched together and shared platforms at anti-Protocol demonstrations against the Irish Sea border. The DUP was rewarded with bolstered support at the polls for adopting a tough stance over the boycott and sharing a platform with Mr Bryson, a self-described “hardline loyalist”. Sir Jeffrey was now distancing himself from the controversial Mr Bryson, who was taking a very public revenge on his former ally and his “surrender deal”. When the social media posts were noticed by DUP staffers, the meeting was halted before tipping over into anarchy. According to Mr Bryson’s account on X, which continued unabated, one member falsely accused police officers present of leaking the speech. Sir Jeffrey defended the officers before the party chairman began barking “phones off!”. There were bizarre and unlikely claims of technology being deployed to jam the phone signal. According to Mr Bryson, a row broke out as some members claimed they needed their phones to see if the loyalist influencer was still tweeting. “Perhaps they can’t hear me at the back,” Mr Bryson observed caustically as hardline unionist allies hailed him as the “Bryson Broadcasting Corporation” Mr Bryson later claimed that “senior people plural within the DUP” were behind the leaks and hinted the mole was wiring a wire. Sir Jeffrey has vowed there will be an investigation. These farcical scenes were the culmination of more than a week of building pressure. The week before last, a meeting of the DUP’s 12 most senior members had not brought the hoped-for announcement of a deal, to the Government’s frustration. It later emerged that Sir Jeffrey had the backing of a majority of that council but had managed to keep it secret until now. Last week, The Telegraph exclusively revealed a string of details of the Government’s offer to the DUP, including a patriotic rebrand of the Irish border’s green lane  to the UK Internal Market Lane. Most explosively, it exposed a Government promise to screen new UK laws to ensure they were border-compliant and did not mean significant extra checks in the Irish Sea. That has led to fears among Brexiteers in Westminster that Mr Sunak was sacrificing Brexit freedoms to get Stormont back up and running. What can’t be denied is that the Irish Sea border is here to stay, the Windsor Framework treaty has not been renegotiated with the EU, and Northern Ireland will continue to follow EU rules. But the DUP had won some concessions, including a boosted 3.3bn financial package for Stormont, and the promise of Westminster legislation guaranteeing Northern Ireland’s place in the UK. Sir Jeffrey was struggling to keep the show on the road, as critics declared the deal was purely cosmetic window dressing. The mice, it was observed, were getting at the hard-won deal, which risked being dead on arrival. Sir Jeffrey needed to finally act. after two years, and moments of what appeared to be crippling indecision. He had resolved to face down his opponents in the DUP. Now, with this crucial meeting in uproar, he was facing the nightmare scenario of his party splitting. Such a schism would further fracture unionism, which is under pressure from twin historic electoral triumphs by Sinn Fein, and further weaken Northern Ireland’s place in the UK. The meeting was to continue for a marathon five hours, during which supporters and opponents of the deal gave speeches for and against. Gradually, slowly, the momentum swung towards Sir Jeffrey. A vote was finally called and the deal was backed , with the caveat that the blessing would only be given once the Government in London laid the promised legislation. It was about 1am when Sir Jeffrey faced the press and announced the party executive had backed the agreement. The Government is expected to lay legislation this week so a two-year boycott that has delayed devolved action on the struggling NHS and cost of living crisis in the UK’s poorest region could soon be over. Tellingly, Sir Jeffrey refused to reveal the numbers voting for and against the deal. He said he was satisfied with the “progress” the deal had made towards meeting the DUP’s much-vaunted seven tests for the deal and described the damaging leaks from the meeting as “a betrayal” and “misrepresentation”. Sir Jeffrey, who has been threatened over his search for a border deal, knows he still has a fight on his hands. “Sell out” posters have been printed up to be plastered over the offices of DUP “Protocol-implementers”. Grassroots loyalist marches against the deal are likely and Mr Bryson has vowed to topple Sir Jeffrey by opposing the agreement “every single day”.  But the DUP leader has now committed to a return to Stormont and by extension the Brexit deal Rishi Sunak struck with the EU last February. After the vote, Sir Jeffrey was relieved and defiant. He told reporters, “To the others who will be quick to say, ‘well, you didn’t get this or that’, I simply ask them, ‘Well, what have you achieved? What’s your change? What have you been able to deliver?’” Load-Date: January 30, 2024  End of Document
