   I went for a pint in Brexit Central and everybody's rather bitter; A wish for sovereignty drove voters in Clacton-on-Sea to Leave. But optimism has given way to anger The Sunday Times (London) June 18, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, Northern Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 21 Length: 1096 words Byline: Josh Glancy Body   Clacton-on-Sea was the centre of the world once, for just a moment. In the run-up to the Brexit referendum, this ailing seaside town in Essex was the heart of the action. It was a cauldron of Europhobia, the scene of countless Nigel Farage publicity stunts, home to Britain's first and only elected Ukip MP, Douglas Carswell, who defected from the Conservatives in 2014. It was the threat of more Clactons that scared David Cameron into promising a referendum on leaving the EU, so in a funny way, more than anyone else in Britain, the voters of Clacton gave us Brexit. In fact Clacton kind of is Brexit, or at least embodies its image: a patriotic, mostly white, throwback of a place, home to a kind of congealed seaside Englishness powered by mobility scooters and nostalgia. Clacton is all our yesterdays. Yet, as the seventh anniversary of the referendum approaches, the tang of disappointment lingers in the salty air. The BBC is holding a Question Time special in the town this week to mark the occasion. The audience will consist exclusively of Leave voters, and they will not be difficult to find in a town where 70 per cent opted for Brexit, one of the most definitive results in the country. But if the people I met in Clacton over the past few days are anything to go by, the Question Time special will be an irritable and indignant www.affair.No one, absolutely not a single person of the dozens I spoke to, thought Brexit was going well. They might disagree on who was to blame ? the Tories, Labour, the Remoaners, the French; there was plenty of blame to go around. But no one thought it was going well. In the Moon and Starfish, a Wetherspoon's pub on the Clacton seafront, the day drinking crowd were well into their third pints by Thursday lunchtime. When I brought up Brexit, it was viewed with a sense of wasted opportunity, like a football team who had thrown away a two-goal lead. "I expected problems from day one. It's the British way," said Trevor, 77, a retired commodities trader. "I hoped it would be good, but it hasn't panned out; the politicians have let us down as usual. Boris is an arsehole. He's always been an arsehole." "Independence" and "standing on our own two feet" were the most common rationales I heard for Brexit, but, like many in Clacton, Trevor had also hoped that leaving the EU would allow the government to drastically reduce immigration. Clearly, this hasn't happened. "We need to stop the boats ? this country is full," he said. Then he looked at me. "I'm not being rude to you, but it's to stop the n*****s coming in." Right then. Brexit has had seven years to prove itself and deliver some of the benefits Clactonites were promised by Farage and Carswell and their like. Thus far, it has utterly failed to do so. Some take the old Trotskyite line that it just hasn't been tried properly yet. "We made the right decision but it hasn't been enacted quickly enough," said Jeff Bray, 64, a local Tory councillor and financial services analyst. "People are frustrated. It's been seven years and here we are still having not completed the job." Bray didn't question his decision to vote Leave, but others in Clacton were starting to wonder if they had made a mistake. There were notable flutters of Regrexit around town. A recent YouGov national poll found that 22 per cent of those who voted to leave the EU now think Britain made the wrong decision. People such as Jean Bailey, 77, a pensioner I met doing her weekly food shop. "I'm not convinced I did the right thing," she told me. "I fell for Boris's promises. I think if we held the referendum again I'd pay more attention this time round. I'd listen to the debates more." Brexit put Clacton's name up in lights for a while. It put the rarely remembered town at the heart of a political revolution. To the big shots in London, Clacton mattered. It doesn't matter now. "It was all very exciting back then," said Valerie Simpson, 75, whom I met drinking fruit juice outside Subway. "Farage and Carswell were here; we were the centre of everything for a while." And today? "I feel disappointed. There was a lot of hype. A lot of promises were made. But we haven't really seen any benefits. I hoped there would be £350 million a week for the NHS." Simpson said she would change her vote to Remain if she had her time again. "I think we got a bit carried away. I worry about the country we're leaving to my grandson." You won't hear any regrets about the referendum result from Farage or Carswell, but the former recently labelled it a "failure". Carswell, who now lives in Mississippi, also thinks Brexit has been a misfire so far. "Right from the getgo they bungled it," he told me. He recalled being "stunned" by how lacklustre Boris Johnson and Michael Gove were the morning after the referendum. Things went downhill from there. "They bungled it on a rather epic scale. A lot of people who voted Leave, without repudiating their decision, have a right to feel quite angry at the sheer ineptitude." Britain finds itself in a bizarre position now, where almost no one thinks Brexit is going well, even some of its most ardent supporters, but any discussion of at least partially reversing it is politically verboten. Neither Labour nor the Tories have any interest in going there. But unless we start to see some more favourable results from Brexit, this may change over the coming decade, particularly as the demographics shift. Many of the Leave voters I spoke to in Clacton are unlikely to be with us for the 17th anniversary of the referendum. And the town's younger residents feel rather differently. "It's absolute shite, isn't it?" said Jordan King-Saupe, 23, a customer service manager at Ladbrokes. King- Saupe was too young to vote in the referendum, but he's not enjoying its aftermath. "I didn't expect much from it, and it hasn't delivered much. They haven't made a good go of it. Just whatever, you know." Whatever, you know. A disappointed shrug. Meh. That, more than anything, is the reaction that Brexit elicits among Clactonites today, no matter their political leanings. Some liberal Tories worry that a sense of resentment and betrayal over Brexit's failures could fuel a far-right populist surge in Britain. But in Clacton, at least, there's no real sign of that. Such an uprising would require belief that a better future is possible. This town's moment of optimism came and went in a flash of purple and yellow. For people in Clacton today, Brexit is just another disappointment. @JoshGlancy 'I'm not being rude,' said Trevor, 'but it was meant to stop the foreigners coming in' Load-Date: June 18, 2023  End of Document
