   I'm A Celeb star Nigel Farage's most shocking moments: From stripping off in the jungle to Brexit and his bombshell love life ahead of ITV final MailOnline December 10, 2023 Sunday 3:15 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: TV&SHOWBIZ; Version:2 Length: 1195 words Byline: Geraint Llewellyn For Mailonline Body   Controversial political Nigel Farage has defied the odds and could soon be crowned King of the Jungle on Sunday after reaching the I'm A Celebrity...Get Me Out Of Here! final. The former UKIP leader, 59, has become an unlikely favourite amongst viewers and is said to be using his success from the show to relaunch his political career - much to the dismay and delight of many.  Hosts Ant & Dec even called for the ITV show to take a break from including politician's in the line-up following Farage's 1.5M signing.  Within the final three Sam Thompson, 31, is currently bookies favourite to walk away champion with 4/11, Nigel pulls up the rear with odds of 9/2 after boxer Tony Bellew's 4/1.  The former MEP and Brexit fan has found himself engulfed in many a controversy over his long career, so here is a look at some of his most shocking moments....  Stripping naked in the jungle  Nigel Farage caused a quite stir at ITV following his 'attention-seeking' tactics in the jungle which saw him stripping completely naked on a number of occasions. His team fired off a legal letter to ITV bosses for showing him naked in the I'm A Celebrity jungle shower. His furious aides claim there is an 'indecency' clause in his contract which bans the channel from showing footage of him nude. Yet former campmate Frankie Dettori has revealed that Nigel's nudity was in breach of the rules, with show bosses telling the stars to keep their underwear on. Speaking after he became the first star to be voted out of the Jungle, Frankie admitted he was bewildered to learn Nigel's bare bottom had been viewed by millions. Speaking to MailOnline, Frankie said: 'Really? The shower is miles away from the camp so we didn't know what was going on, I'm not going to spy on Nigel's butt. 'Really? We were told to keep our swimmers on!' Nigel's 18-year-old daughter Izzy has also spoken out about the nudity, admitting his family warned him about washing naked in the camp. When asked how she felt about millions seeing her father nude, she told MailOnline: 'We did warn him! We did say people get filmed in the shower. 'But, hey, he's a confident guy, he's confident in himself so fair play, fair play.' Despite warnings from producers and loved ones, Nigel hasn't been deterred from stripping off. Brexit Nigel was Leader of the UK Independence Party (UKIP) from 2006 to 2009 and again in 2010 until 2016, before going on to lead the Brexit and later renamed Reform party.  He entered the world stage as the face the Brexit movement and the UK leaving the European Union, which occurred following a referendum in 2016, even becoming pals with former president Donald Trump. Nigel found himself embraced and reviled in equal measure as a result of his work and was even pelted with a milkshake in Newcastle in 2019. He =was also injured when his plane crashed to the ground during a terrifying accident in 2010.  The aircraft nosedived after a Vote UKIP banner accidentally wrapped around the tail.  Nigel was left so badly injured that he underwent a neck reconstruction and had his leg in a plaster cast for a year.  During during his time in the jungle he told Josie Gibson about how he still feels the effects, including difficulty using his right hand as a result of a bruised spinal cord. He also revealed how he thought about multiple women before the aeroplane hit the ground.  'Secret' girlfriend Laure Ferrari  Nigel keeps his personal life out of the public eye until long term girlfriend Laure Ferrari went public with their relationship as jetted off down under in preparation to meet him.  He previously split from Kirsten Mehr in 2017 after 18 years of marriage. They have two daughters, Isabelle, 18, and Victoria, 23.  He met the French right wing politician, 44, around this time when she was working as a waitress in Strasbourg.  After the exchange with the then 28-year-old, Nigel appointed her as a parliamentary assistant in charge of environmental issues in the UK - her first job in politics. From there she was made PR director of Nigel's parliamentary group Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy in 2009 and eventually worked for the French nationalist party. In 2017 - right when she moved in with Nigel as a 'lodger' - she headed up a Eurosceptic think tank which was accused of illegally diverting £400,000 of public money to UKIP - before the UK General Election and Brexit referendum.  Despite the yawning gap in their ages and roles, Laure told MailOnline: 'I was first attracted to Nigel's values as a man. He has loyalty, empathy and never breaks his promises. I find that very attractive.' Accusations of racism  Known for his strict immigration stance, Nigel was previously accused of of having been a racist when he was a schoolboy - accusations the politician strongly denied.  In 2013 Channel Four News broadcasted comments from teachers at Dulwich College that the teenage Farage was a 'fascist' and a 'racist' when a pupil at the private London school in the late 1970s and early 1980s.  A letter from 1981 claims Nigel was even heard 'shouting Hitler Youth songs'. The claims did not prevent him being appointed as a prefect at the school.  Speaking about the accusations he said: 'Yes of course I said some ridiculous things, not necessarily racist things. It depends how you define it.  Nigel was also slammed by Jewish groups for forming a pact with far-right Polish politician Robert Iwaszkiewicz who has been branded a Holocaust denier.  In 2022 football pundit Gary Neville furiously branded him a 'f*****g idiot' in a foul-mouth Tweet.  Writing: "I can't believe this f*****g idiot has been prominent in politics in this country for the last few years, He's divisive, dangerous and a disgrace to the UK. Breastfeeding backlash  Nigel has been slammed numerous times for his 'contempt for women' in 2014 after saying breastfeeding mother should 'sit in the corner'. The incident occurred when Mother-of-three Lou Burns, 35, was left humiliated after staff at the five-star Mayfair hotel Claridge's gave her a giant napkin to cover up as she fed her daughter Isadora during afternoon tea. Nigel then waded into the debate, suggesting mothers of newborn babies should avoid being 'openly ostentatious' when breastfeeding and might think about sitting in a corner when doing so. He defended the hotel's right to tell customers how to behave, saying: 'Frankly that's up to Claridges. I very much take the view that if you are running an establishment you should have rules.' And, when asked if women should be told to go a toilet to breastfeed, Mr Farage replied: 'Or perhaps sit in a corner or whatever it might be. That's up to Claridges.'  His comments sparked fury, with many Twitter users suggesting that Mr Farage himself should 'hide in the corner' over his 'outrageous' stance. Mumsnet chief executive Justine Roberts also added that it was 'bemusing' for anyone to think of breastfeeding as 'ostentatious'.  But as the backlash over his comments grew, the outspoken MP attempted to play down the controversy by insisting he did not 'personally endorse' women perhaps sitting in a corner. I'm A Celebrity...Get Me Out Of Here! Live Final Sunday 10 December at 9.00pm on ITV1 and ITVX.  Load-Date: December 10, 2023  End of Document
