   I'm A Celebrity's launch show is hit by Ofcom complaints over Nigel Farage's appearance on the show and comments critical of right-wing politics... after 'woke' bias accusations MailOnline November 22, 2023 Wednesday 1:33 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: TV&SHOWBIZ; Version:1 Length: 751 words Byline: Melody Fletcher For Mailonline Body   I'm A Celebrity has been hit by more than 70 Ofcom complaints over Nigel Farage's appearance on the show and comments critical of right-wing politics. The popular ITV reality show returned to screens on Sunday night with its hotly-anticipated launch, but it prompted some Ofcom complaints from viewers. Nigel Farage has controversially joined the line-up this year, and made his debut on the show alongside stars including Josie Gibson, Fred Sirieix and Sam Thompson. The former Brexit Party leader's appearance on the show prompted 42 viewers to complain to Ofcom after the launch programme.  However, there were also 31 complaints relating to comments which were critical of right-wing politics, after Nigel's army of fans accused the show of 'woke' bias. Nigel is known for his right-wing views on immigration and gender pay gaps, and viewers have laid into Ant and Dec after they made a 'far right' joke during the launch. Another 24 complaints related to a joke made by Ant and Dec related to the city of Sunderland, taking the overall complaints about the launch show to 103. The joke saw the hosts compare the Australian outback to Sunderland, with Ant saying: 'In case you're not familiar with the Australian outback, it's a barren, deeply hostile environment that's barely fit for human habitation,' while Dec added: 'Imagine Sunderland but hotter.' MailOnline has contacted ITV for comment. It comes after Nigel's fans were left irate after the launch show when he was immediately the butt of a series of Brexit-related jokes. Some said the barrage of Brexit jokes only makes them want Nigel, who is said to have been paid £1.5million to appear, to win more, amid a boycott by left-wingers.  One critic said: 'So after ten minutes.. two Brexit insults, Ant & Dec saying GB News only has two viewers, Nigel's driving was veering 'too far to the right'. NO insults for other contestants? He was invited by a far left show to ridicule him... sad *****!' The gags at his expense - also viewed as digs of Britons who voted Brexit - began as soon as Nigel was dropped off in the outback where he met This Morning's Josie Gibson, 38, who made a quip about Brexit just moments later.  'It's something different in life, it's an adventure. It's a challenge, it's not going to be easy, but why not?' said Nigel, as Josie explained that she was 'petrified.' She responded: 'It can't be worse than Brexit.' Nigel said: 'Oh, didn't take long did it? Didn't take long. I had a feeling we'd get a bit of that,' to which Josie insisted that she was 'only joking'. Minutes later, Nigel had to drive 4x4 with Josie and TikTok star Nella Rose. Ant and Dec didn't miss a beat - saying: 'Is it me, or did he veer just a bit too far to the right?' And shortly after that Ant & Dec took a swipe at rival channel GB News, which Nigel is taking a break from to appear in the jungle.  Following some viewers declaring they would boycott the show due to the former Brexit leaders appearance, Dec said: 'The man who had got everyone talking, Nigel Farage. 'Now, Nigel is not just known for his controversial political career, he's also got his own show on GB news. 'Of course he won't be presenting that show over the next three weeks, so we'd like to take this opportunity to apologise to all of GB News viewers.'  Ant quipped: 'Sorry Keith, Sorry Linda' - to roars of laughter from their crew. However, this week I'm A Celebrity has reportedly been hit by a behind-the-scenes row over politician Nigel's airtime on the show. The GB News presenter sent viewers into a frenzy when he accidentally flashed his bare bottom to campmate Josie Gibson in the jungle shower. And now sources claim that crew members are questioning whether Nigel is getting 'too much screen time', with Nigel aware of the moves he has to take to get more exposure on the show. A source told The Sun: 'The jungle shower is always a big scene but I don't think anyone expected Farage to be first out the gate, nor to do so with such aplomb. 'The crew are feeling torn. They're all professionals and everyone can recognise Farage makes great telly but, of course, many harbour their own opinions on Brexit and immigration. 'And on a wider level it's left bosses with something of a dilemma - embrace Farage as the star of the show or stay conscious of the outcry over his casting and limit his airtime.'  During Tuesday's show, Nigel told campmate Grace Dent that he was disappointed he hadn't been voted for the latest trial as 'if you leave camp you get 25 per cent of the airtime'. Load-Date: November 22, 2023  End of Document
