   I'm A Celeb's Fred Sirieix clashes with Nigel Farage again as he 'created a big mess' over Brexit coventrytelegraph.net November 27, 2023 Monday 7:06 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: TV; Version:1 Length: 315 words Byline: By, Charlotte McLaughlin, PA & Steven Smith Highlight: The French TV star clashed with the former Ukip leader over Brexit again as dinner was cooking Body   Fred Sirieix has said former Ukip leader Nigel Farage "destroyed the economy" with his Brexit campaign on the latest episode of I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here! The campmates have previously had an argument on the ITV1 reality TV show over advertisements used by Farage during the vote to leave the European Union. During Sunday's episode, Farage said when he first stood in an election he said he did not care "if no one votes" for him. He added: "I feel better about myself for doing this. I believe I'm doing the right thing." While making dinner, Sirieix interrupted saying: "The thing is Nigel, you destroyed the economy." The former politician turned GB News presenter called it "absolute bllocks" and said there were issues in European economies. Sirieix also said: "One thing they said during the Brexit vote is 'we're going to get £350million a week that we can redirect to the NHS and build new hospitals and free care and all that'. Never happened." Farage told the Bush Telegraph that the French maitre d'hotel "loves the European Union" which is "fine". He added: "Fred can't help himself occasionally. Occasionally, that bubbling resentment and anger brims up to the surface." Sirieix also said that Farage has "created a big mess" and asked him to name three benefits of Brexit. Farage named control of borders, self-governance and the nuclear submarine deal with Australia -the later of which he said was "good" that the French were upset about. "The point about it is we can make a mess of it ourselves if we choose to," he said. Sirieix said that the UK was making a mess before Farage replied, saying: "I've always argued that for self-governance." The episode also announced This Morning presenter Josie Gibson and restaurant critic Grace Dent will face the next trial, which has been dubbed Down The Tubes. I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here! continues on ITV1 and ITVX. Load-Date: November 27, 2023  End of Document
