   Irish Sea border' on goods axed in deal to restore Assembly   Irish Examiner February 1, 2024 Thursday  Copyright 2024 Landmark Digital Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 604 words Byline: David Young Body   Routine post-Brexit checks on goods shipped from Britain to final destinations in Northern Ireland are to be removed, as part of a deal to restore powersharing at Stormont. DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson has hailed the move as a key concession that will effectively scrap the contentious so-called "Irish Sea border" for goods destined to remain within Britain. "There should not be a border within the UK internal market. These proposals remove that border," he said. The measure is part of a wide-ranging deal agreed between the DUP and the British government, that is set to bring about the restoration of devolved government in Northern Ireland after a two-year hiatus. British prime minister Rishi Sunak said restored powersharing in Northern Ireland offered the prospect of a "brighter future". Mr Sunak told the Commons: "After two years without an Executive, there is now a prospect of powersharing back up and running MDASH strengthening our union, giving people the local, accountable government that they need, and offering a brighter future for Northern Ireland." The DUP has agreed to drop its two-year blockade of Stormont in exchange for the measures, which are aimed at addressing its concerns about post-Brexit trading arrangements. The Stormont Assembly could sit again as soon as Saturday. Tánaiste Micheal Martin said he does not anticipate any concerns being raised by the EU over a new deal. "For goods that are going from the UK into Northern IrelandMDASHthat are staying in Northern Ireland MDASH we've always been of the view that the more streamlined and seamless one can make that, the better all around. "We want any of the frameworks we put in place to work for industry, business, and jobs in Northern Ireland." He described the new trading arrangements as "more effective and sensible". Mr Martin said he gets the sense, from speaking to political parties in Northern Ireland, that there is now a need for a "sustainable restoration" of the Assembly and Executive to deal with issues across the six counties. "There's a lot of work to be done to persuade and convince the people of Northern Ireland that their vote matters, in respect of who they elect to the Assembly, and that it can lead to politics working in Northern Ireland." Jeffrey Donaldson has secured the backing of party colleagues to accept the deal, but there are those within the DUP who remain deeply sceptical of the proposed agreement to restore powersharing. Speaking in the Commons, East Antrim MP Sammy Wilson voiced his concerns as he heavily criticised the government. "When the Northern Ireland Assembly sits, ministers and Assembly members will be expected by law to adhere to and implement laws which are made in Brussels, which they had no say over and no ability to amend, and no ability to stop," he said. "This is a result of this spineless, weakkneed, Brexit-betraying government refusing to take on the EU and its interference in Northern Ireland." Under the deal, the post-Brexit red lane for transporting goods from Britain to Northern Ireland and on into the EU Single Market will remain, but the command paper offers measures aimed at reducing the volume of trade required to use that red-tape heavy route MDASH with a prediction that 80% of goods will now move free of routine checks through the internal market system. The move to reduce post-Brexit checks on British-Northern Irish trade would represent a change to the current EU/BritainWindsor Framework agreement and therefore would require Brussels approval. It is understood the EU has been kept up to date with the shape of the British government's package of measures. Graphic    Picture, DUP leader Jeffery Donaldson during a press conference at Hillsborough Castle yesterday. Picture: Niall Carson/PA Load-Date: February 21, 2024  End of Document
