   Jenrick: ;naive' Brexit policies to blame for surge in net migration; TORY CONFERENCE: WORK VISAS CRACKDOWN The Express October 3, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 678 words Byline: Michael Knowles Body   BRITAIN must use Brexit freedoms to cut net migration after taking a soft approach since the 2016 vote, Robert Jenrick has declared. The Immigration Minister - a close ally of Rishi Sunak - revealed substantial changes will be needed to restore control and reduce pressure on creaking public services. Migrants could have to earn £34,528 to qualify for a work visa, under plans being considered. Foreign workers might also face limits on the number of family members they can bring with them. And the Government could launch a crackdown on the care visa route, amid fears many are using it as a way into the country. Mr Jenrick did not rule out a cap on the number of migrants. He told a Policy Exchange fringe event at the Conservative conference: "What I'm concerned about is the consequences of some decisions made after we left the European Union, which turned out to be significant liberalisations of the present system, and in some cases quite naive about the consequences. "There are reforms to be done which will unwind some of that. We are bringing in quite a large number people who are lower skilled. The current salary threshold that the points-based system applies is just over £26,000. "That is not, to most people's definition, a high-skilled worker. So I can see a good argument for increasing that to something more akin to the median salary." The average salary in the UK is £34,528, according to the latest ONS employment figures. Mr Jenrick added: "There are a very large number of people coming in on the care visa route - 120,000. That is something that needs careful consideration. "Then there are other areas, like the ability to bring family members into the UK from around the world, even if you don't have the resources to look after those people." Mr Jenrick said Brexit should be a catalyst for Britain to "protect our bor ge co borders and make intelligent choices about who comes in for what". He added: "Brexit gave politicians like the Home p Secretary and I the levers which we can pull to control legal migration. "That will be proven in the years ahead. We are living in an age of mass migration. You see tens, if not hundreds, of millions of people on the move looking to come to develop countries like the UK, where the economic prospects will be better. "We have to have control over the levers to ensure we protect our borders, our sovereignty and make intelligent choices about who comes in, for what reason. Where we've gone wrong, is immediately after leaving the EU, we established a legal migration system that was, if anything, more liberal than the system we had when we were in the European Union. "You've seen some reforms already. We made a significant one earlier in the year, with respect to dependents - people coming to university bringing their family members with them, often used as a back door to life in the UK. "But further substantial changes are going to be necessary. The model we've adopted is not working, and we can't continue it. "And that's why we do need to finish the revolution we started with Brexit, by not just taking back control of those levers, but exercising them so we can make intelligent choices and reduce the amount of legal migration."Net migration has surged to a record 600,000 - heaping pressure on ministers to slash it after years of repeated promises. It is almost three times the number at the time of the Brexit vote in 2016, when net migration stood at around 223,000 a year, and well beyond David Cameron's pledge to limit migration to "tens of thousands". Mr Jenrick said Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and Home Secretary Suella Braverman are committed to reducing legal migration. He said: "The age of mass migration we're living in completely validates the decision to leave the EU. "It is already clear having control of those levers is incredibly important.And it will be even more so in the decades to come. "That's why so many people voted to leave the EU. We have to not just back control of the levers of immigration, but exercise them." 'We have to make intelligent choices on who comes in' Graphic    Criticism... Suella Braverman, Main picture, migrants arriving at Dover yesterdayTough talk... Robert Jenrick Load-Date: October 3, 2023  End of Document
