   Keir and the cynical plot to betray Brexit; Daily mail COMMENT Mail on Sunday (London) September 20, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 287 words Body   BREXIT supporters have often been ridiculed as paranoid for suggesting Sir Keir Starmer would manoeuvre Britain into rejoining the EU if he won power. Today, those concerns don't seem so absurd. A day after Labour's leader - an irreconcilable Remainer - vowed he would rewrite the trade deal brokered by Boris Johnson, and as he met President Emmanuel Macron in Paris, plans aimed at drawing the UK back into Brussels' orbit emerged. With cynical timing, France and Germany proposed we become an 'associate member' of a new, expanded, four-tier Europe. True, we would not be bound by 'ever closer union' to the sclerotic bloc. That, though, is where any good news ends. To participate in the single market, we would have to pay billions, accept free movement and observe EU law. And we would be forced to align with Brussels' rules (while having no say in making them), torpedoing our ability to strike better trade deals around the world. This would be catnip to Sir Keir, who could sign up without a referendum. But it would be a disgraceful betrayal of the millions who voted to take back control. What part of Brexit doesn't the EU understand? Why would we now rejoin by the back door? Contrary to what embittered Remainers claim, Brexit has not been a disaster. Successes include trade agreements with fast-growing economies, delivering the quickest Covid vaccine and arming Ukraine. But ministers must do more to seize the huge opportunities it offers - and prevent any danger of our departure being reversed. Yes, Sir Keir insists he respects Brexit. But given all his previous flip-flops, this must be taken with a pinch of salt. If he becomes PM, he surely would have no qualms about surrendering our hard-won sovereignty. Load-Date: September 20, 2023  End of Document
