   Labour opposition pledges vague Brexit review challenged by pundits CE Noticias Financieras English September 19, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1062 words Body   The leader of the British Labor Party, Keir Starmer, has begun to publicly expose his plans to try to correct, if he becomes the Government, the economic disaster that has meant the exit of the United Kingdom from the EU. This Tuesday he is meeting, behind closed doors and without a joint press conference - to avoid diplomatic friction with Rishi Sunak's government - with the President of France, Emmanuel Macron. The polls are tenacious in recent months and give Labour a hypothetical electoral victory, after more than 13 years in opposition. Its leader, Keir Starmer, has been determined to prevent, during the long year ahead of him until the general election, the toxic legacy of Brexit from poisoning his path to Downing Street. He is aware of the general disappointment in the country, seven years after that EU divorce referendum. According to the latest YouGov poll last July, 55% of Britons would vote today to remain in the EU club, compared to a meager 31% who would still support leaving. But Starmer also knows that any attempt to resurrect that national debate, which pitted families against each other and left citizens exhausted and bitter, would backfire. A vague and unambitious solution For all these cautions and fears, the solution chosen by the Labour leader has been technical, vague and unambitious. He clings to Article 776 of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA), the treaty that involved years of tough and complex negotiations between London and Brussels, to avoid an abrupt break-up, and which came into force in January 2021. The ATT states: "The parties shall jointly review the implementation of this Agreement and supplemental agreements, and any related matters, five years after the entry into force of this Agreement, and every five years [after that first review]." Labour has found in that clause, vague and open to many interpretations, the tool to sustain its promise to fix a calamitous Brexit, without the need to talk again about rejoining the Internal Market or the common customs area, let alone a new referendum. "Practically, everybody admits that the deal that [Boris] Johnson managed to clinch is not a good deal. It's very weak," Starmer asserted last week in the interview with the Financial Times newspaper, with which he wanted to begin explaining his proposal. "I'm not going to let them grow up in a world where I can just tell them that their future is going to be worse than it could have been," the politician lamented. The possibility of regaining some freedom of movement for young people, curtailed by Brexit, is part of that unambitious package of proposals that Labour would like to include in a future review of the ATT. Alongside it, Starmer's team includes new agreements on veterinary control regulations; mutual recognition of conformity assessment for certain products or professional qualifications; greater flexibility in allowing short-term labor movements; new partnerships with EU-driven programs; equivalence agreements in financial services; and even a new security pact. Analyst and EuroIntelligence director Wolfgang Münchau wrote Monday, "Keir Starmer's attempt to rewrite the [UK-EU] relationship is based on a delusion that it is possible to stay out of the internal market and customs union and still get a better deal." Labour pretends to ignore the little appetite that exists today in Brussels to reopen negotiations that consumed enormous efforts and resources of the EU institutions, as well as leaving a bitter taste in the relations between the UK and the EU. If the British opposition finally takes over the government in a year's time, it will be a long time before Starmer decides to tackle this issue. By then there would already be a new European Commission, with different priorities and concerns. Germany, France, Italy and the Netherlands are facing their own problems, with weak economies, Münchau recalls, and do not have time to devote to the new aspirations of a country, the United Kingdom, which is already outside the club. The paths to a new Brexit The organization UK in a Changin Europe, a think tank funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, has just this Tuesday presented a realistic report on the possibilities for revision and improvement contained in the ATT, and on the approach Labour has put on the table. "The kind of agreements Labour pursues often involve lengthy and technical negotiations that take years to conclude. They will require significant administrative resources, and continued alignment with EU regulations over which the UK will have no say. In turn, the EU will need to be able to rely on future UK governments, which may be more Eurosceptic [than the hypothetical Starmer Executive], to uphold the new arrangements," the report concludes. The organization sets out the three avenues that, according to its own analysts, could open up in a future revision of the ATT. A minimalist model, which would limit itself to examining whether the agreement and its procedures are working properly (that is, at present, the EU's aspiration); a moderate model, which would aim to exploit the potential of the agreement; and a maximalist model, which would expand the scope for collaboration between the EU and the UK. UK in a Changing Europe warns the parties in its report of the need, whichever path is chosen, to start preparing for negotiations. However, Starmer himself admits that the efforts made by Conservative Prime Minister Rishi Sunak to improve relations with the EU have borne fruit. The so-called Windsor Framework Agreement, signed by Sunak and European Commission President Ursula von Der Leyen last February, put an end to the long-running dispute over Northern Ireland's place in the post-Brexit era. And just this September, the British government announced its reinstatement in the EU's Horizon science program, one of the most lamented losses as a result of the friction between London and Brussels. Starmer is beginning to hear, from the Conservative ranks, accusations of wanting to reverse Brexit and for the UK to return to those years of division and confrontation. In the coming months he will have to demonstrate to what extent he is willing to make this issue the center of the political debate in an intensely electoral year. Follow all the international news on Facebook and Twitter, or in our weekly newsletter. Load-Date: September 20, 2023  End of Document
