   LABOUR leader is finally catching up with the public's Brexit regret i-news September 19, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 9 Length: 724 words Byline: Sir John Curtice Body   Ever since he became Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer has seemingly not wanted to talk about Brexit. Wounded by the loss of Leave-voting Red Wall seats, the Labour leader and his party have largely avoided an issue on which they felt they were rejected by voters in 2019. Starmer even marched his MPs into voting for the Trade and Co-operation Agreement with the EU when it was unveiled at the last minute in December 2020. Yet now the future of Britain's relationship with the EU is on the Labour leader's agenda. Last week he was arguing Britain needed closer co-operation with the EU on immigration. Now Starmer has suggested a Labour government would be looking to negotiate a significantly closer trading relationship with the EU than the one for which he and his party voted three years ago. He is still adamant that Labour should not re-enter the European single market or customs union, let alone rejoin the EU, but both the tone and the substance of his latest remarks are significantly different from Labour's The proportion British public vote to according recent stance hitherto. Unsurprisingly, the Conservatives have attacked these latest utterances. They have argued Starmer's proposed deal on immigration would mean accepting 100,000 asylum seekers a year as part of the EU's "burden sharing" policy, and that Starmer would talk Britain back to "square one on Brexit, reopening the arguments of the past all over again". However, the electoral calculus on Brexit in general and immigration in particular has moved on since Leave voters gave Boris Johnson an 80-seat majority in 2019. Rather than taking a risk, it is perhaps surprising that it has taken Starmer this long to be willing to distance his party from the Conservatives on these issues. Public opinion did not just swing against the Conservatives during their leadership soap opera last year. It also moved against Brexit too. Currently the polls suggest on average that 58 per cent would now vote to rejoin the EU. Only 42 per cent would back staying out - down 10 points on the proportion who voted Leave in 2016. According to YouGov, 56 per cent believe that "in hindsight" the UK was wrong to leave the EU, while just 32 per cent reckon it was right. This change of mood has made it possible for Labour to increase its support in the polls without, as it once thought necessary, having to be especially successful at winning over those who wish to stay out of the EU. While it has won over some of those who voted Leave in 2016, they are disproportionately people who have changed their minds about Brexit. At the same time, some of those Leave voters who stayed loyal to Labour in 2019 have now swung in favour of rejoining too. And those Labour supporters who did not vote in the 2016 EU referendum (including those who were too young to do so) are heavily in favour of rejoining. Consequently, around three in four of those currently backing Labour say they would now vote to rejoin the EU. This is little different from the proportion of its 2019 supporters who backed Remain. Labour's support is even heavily pro-EU in Tory-held seats that voted Leave in 2016. of the who would the EU, to a poll Meanwhile, voters have concluded that Brexit has not brought about the reduction in immigration that Leave voters, at least, had anticipated. According to polling by Redfield and Wilton for the UK in a Changing Europe, only 18 per cent of all voters believe leaving the EU has reduced immigration. Meanwhile, in polling Ipsos conducted recently for British Future a record 66 per cent said they were dissatisfied with the way the Government is handling immigration. The Conservatives may well now have lost credibility on immigration, potentially blunting the force of their attacks on Labour. In any event, according to Focaldata, 53 per cent believe it is "very important" for Britain to work closely with the EU on immigration. Meanwhile, We Think reports that as many as 43 per cent back the idea of accepting a quota of EU migrants in return for being able to send back to the EU those who arrive in the UK illegally. In truth, rather than being especially bold, Starmer may be playing catch-up on Brexit. Sir John Curtice is a professor of politics at Strathclyde University and senior research fellow at the National Centre for Social Research and the UK in a Changing Europe Load-Date: September 18, 2023  End of Document
