   Labour wants rapprochement with EU; Hopes rest on rotational review of trade deal. Will this reverse Brexit? Die Welt (English) September 22, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Axel Springer SE All Rights Reserved  Section: ECONOMY; Pg. 9; No. 185 Length: 1121 words Byline: Claudia Wanner Body      London King Charles III described the British-French relationship as "close allies and best friends" in his speech to the French Senate on Thursday. Both states, he said, are happier and more prosperous because so many thousands of citizens live in each other's countries. The monarch made similar comments about Anglo-German relations during his visit to Berlin. But when French President Emmanuel Macron mentioned Brexit at a state banquet in Versailles in honor of the king, it was directly condemned by the tabloid Daily Mail as a "jibe" against the king. Despite such classic behavioral patterns: the Brexit, Brussels and the European Union have been discussed less emotionally in the United Kingdom in recent months than in the past. "The Brexit discussion may be entering a new phase," said Anand Menon, professor of European politics at King's College in London. Difficulties on trade issues are being addressed more pragmatically, and possible areas for rapprochement are being discussed. Keir Starmer, leader of the opposition Labour Party, has made that clear in recent days. Should his party win the next election, he said, he would push for a fundamental revision of the Brexit deal. Labour has been in a clear lead in the polls for months, with an election expected in the fall of 2024. "Almost everyone understands that the deal [former Prime Minister Boris] Johnson struck is not a good deal - it's far too thin," Starmer told the Financial Times over the weekend. The Trade and Cooperation Agreement, or TCA for short, which was negotiated virtually at the last minute just before Christmas 2020, has governed the economic relationship between the EU and the U.K. since early 2021. Starmer has already identified a good opportunity for new talks. A review of the agreement is due after five years, the document stipulates. "Over the course of 2025, we will try to get a significantly better deal for the U.K." His goal, he said, is a "significantly closer trading relationship." Starmer had earlier stated an easing of strict border controls on live animals and food and mutual recognition of professional qualifications as goals. In addition, he mentioned closer cooperation on security, innovation and research. At the same time, however, the Labour leader ruled out a customs union or joining the European single market - setting a narrow framework for talks. In fact, the TCA provides for regular reviews. "The parties shall jointly review the implementation of this agreement and supplementary agreements and other related matters five years after the entry into force of this agreement, and at five-year intervals thereafter," Article 776 of the TCA states. David Lammy, Labour's shadow cabinet minister for external affairs, sees the review as an opportunity to "go page by page through the TCA, looking at ways to remove barriers and improve opportunities for business," and it's not just the opposition that is banking on this opportunity. Northern Ireland Minister Steve Baker also believes "we could make great progress with the TCA review. " But that euphoria misses the real point of the review, which in the EU context is more of a technical specification, said Joël Reland of the think tank UK in a Changing Europe. "A renegotiation would be unusual." A fixed framework for extensive revisions is not envisaged and has not been used in comparable treaties so far. In Brussels, he said, there have been at best very sporadic talks on the subject. Indeed, Commission Vice President Maroš Šefčovič has already said that the review does not mean that the TCA will be unraveled again. If nothing else, that's because of a very different perception of the treaties, said Reland's colleague Jannike Wachowiak. "From the EU's point of view, the TCA is a good deal." In any case, there would be widespread Brexit fatigue in Brussels. And after all, he said, EU officials are busy with a host of pressing issues that rank much higher on the priority list, from the war in Ukraine to migration to the Green Deal. Still, it's not impossible that a more extensive review could occur, agree the two scholars, who have just submitted a report on the review of the TCA and possible ways forward. "Political acceptance on both sides would be needed to expand the agreement," Wachowiak said. A top-level meeting of member states could provide an opportunity to discuss such ambitions, which in turn would require clear responsibilities to be established. An important obstacle that needs to be removed is the lack of trust in the United Kingdom after the troublesome Brexit negotiations, Wachowiak said. A fresh start in terms of personnel, meanwhile, offers that opportunity. Starmer has been in The Hague in recent days for talks with Europol and has met President Macron in Paris. In recent years, responsiveness from political leaders has been lacking, said Mujtaba Rahman, who heads European operations at Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy. "If Starmer delivers that, it will create goodwill. " But given the ambiguous review clause in the TCA, it is first critical for the U.K. and the EU to define clear goals and structures, Reland said. "And if a future U.K. government wants to use the review to extend the TCA, they should think soon about what that might look like in practice and how to get the EU to agree." Because even if the trade agreements work quite well from a European perspective - a view not shared by large parts of the British business community - there are adjacent areas with which the British side could score points. The mobility of young people is one of them. Study visits to the UK have become very expensive since the UK withdrew from the Erasmus program. Interest in this remains high. Closer cooperation on emissions trading would also be conceivable. Since Brexit, the UK has set up its own system in which the cost of emissions is now cheaper than in the EU because of less stringent restrictions. Closer coordination would underscore concessions. Rahman also points to opportunities for cooperation in foreign and security policy. In addition to food border controls, the perennial fisheries dispute offers opportunities, he said. "The details will take time, of course. " But even the expected small steps should be worthwhile, believes Peter Foster, author of the book "What went wrong with Brexit." "Neighborliness and proximity matter. To date, the U.K. is not a third country like any other." Disclaimer: Translation automatically generated. Axel Springer is not liable for any automatically generated translation of written text, audio tracks or other translatable media items. Legally binding is exclusively the original German text or spoken word. Original full page PDF Graphic    Keir Starmer is leader of the Labour Party. He is ahead in the polls Load-Date: September 21, 2023  End of Document
