   Labour uses Brexit to talk down UK, accuses Badenoch The Daily Telegraph (London) October 2, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 374 words Byline: Nick Gutteridge Body   KEMI BADENOCH will today accuse Labour of "relentlessly wanting to talk down our country" by blaming Britain's problems on Brexit. The Business Secretary will tell the Tory party conference in Manchester that Sir Keir Starmer's only answer to the UK's problems is to "ask the EU what to do next". She will warn that Eurosceptics risk "losing" in the long term unless they keep making positive arguments for remaining outside the EU. Mrs Badenoch will attack Labour's push for closer ties with the EU, calling Sir Keir, the party leader, "not someone who believes in the UK's ability to think for itself ". She will say that nations such as Germany and Japan have also experienced problems with supply chains and ageing populations, adding: "It is only when I am back in the UK that I am told that all these issues are down to Brexit. "Our political opponents are obsessed with viewing every problem as Brexit, relentlessly wanting to talk down our country." Mrs Badenoch will say many claims made about the damage Brexit has caused are untrue and will emphasise benefits such as free trade deals, but will add: "I'm not here to tell you that leaving the EU was without challenges. "That would not be true. People knew it would take time and there would be challenges along the way." The senior Cabinet minister, who backed Leave in 2016, will warn that Brexit could be at risk from a persistent rejoin movement, adding: "We must acknowledge what we might lose if we assume the arguments are won forever. "The people who tell you that Brexit is the cause of every problem do so because they think the answer to everything is the EU. "Listen to what Keir Starmer says. His answer to the global challenges we face is to tax more, regulate more and ask the EU what to do next." Sir Keir has ruled out taking the UK back into the EU's single market or customs union, but wants to deepen economic ties. Mrs Badenoch is expected to position herself as a minister who has a track record of delivering rather than focusing on political rhetoric, as several top Tories jostle to position themselves as potential future leaders. She will talk about her work on reducing Britain's reliance on China for electric cars and signing the Trans- Pacific Partnership trade pact. Load-Date: October 2, 2023  End of Document
