   Labour opposition leader said he will renegotiate Brexit: 55% of Britons think it was a mistake to leave the European Union CE Noticias Financieras English September 18, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 535 words Body   "I will renegotiate the Brexit deal," Keir Starmer, the U.K.'s Labour leader, said as the country prepares for a general election. And he added said he will seek a "much better deal" with the European Union in the 2025 review..... The remarks by Sir Keir Starmer, a former crown attorney and successful human rights lawyer to the British newspaper Financial Times came in Montreal, where he attended a meeting of Third Way campaigners, attended by Canadian Premier Justin Troudeau and former British Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair. Brexit has ceased to be popular in Great Britain, after the referendum that enshrined it and divided the country. The proportion of people who think Brexit and leaving the EU was a right or wrong decision between 2020-2023 has changed .It is no longer popular. In August 2023, 55 percent of people in Britain thought it was a mistake to leave the European Union, compared with 33 percent, who thought it was the right decision. British Premier Rishi Sunak and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen. AFP Photo Starmer outlined a plan to manage the effects of Brexit. "I think more can be achieved across the board," he said . By 2025 Keir Starmer will seek "a major renegotiation of Britain's relationship with the European Union" if the opposition Labour Party wins the next election. In an interview with the Financial Times, the Labour leader, who polls show is on track to become Britain's next prime minister, pledged to undertake a significant rewrite of the UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA). That agreement, reached under former Prime Minister Boris Johnson, is due for review in 2025. "Almost everyone recognizes that the deal Johnson reached is not a good deal. It's too meager," Starmer said. "As we get closer to 2025, we will try to get a much better deal for the U.K.," he said. "I think more can be achieved across the board," he added. Starmer cited security, innovation and research as areas where closer ties could be sought, the Financial Times reported. Since taking over as leader, Starmer has emphasized that he accepts Brexit. He repeatedly ruled out reversing the 2016 referendum result or seeking to rejoin the EU customs union or single market. "Make it work." Instead, he has argued that the U.K. Conservatives have failed to make the most of their exit from the bloc. "We have to make it work," Starmer said. "It's not about going back in. But I refuse to accept that we can't make it work. I'm thinking of future generations when I say that." "I have a 15-year-old son and a 12-year-old daughter. I'm not going to let them grow up in a world where all I have to tell them about their future is to tell them, " It's going to be worse than it could have been otherwise." Starmer made the comments at a meeting of center-left leaders in Montreal. At the same meeting, he told Anne McElvoy of Politico that the U.K. should "get out of the way" of China. On the country's exit from the EU, he said : "I firmly believe that since Brexit, there has been a sense that we have not simply left the EU.We have somehow turned our backs on the world and everywhere I go, people feel almost the absence of the UK, once a leading voice and now rarely consulted." PB Load-Date: September 19, 2023  End of Document
