   Labour 'hires army of Remainers to drag us back into the EU' Scottish Daily Mail December 30, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 38 Length: 351 words Byline: Jason Groves Body   LABOUR is recruiting an army of Remainer candidates to 'drag us back into the EU', it was claimed last night. Analysis of Labour candidate selections suggests that more than a quarter are formally endorsed by the Labour Movement for Europe, which is pushing for the party to negotiate access to the EU's single market. About 50 candidates have already signed up to 'uphold and promote the values and vision of the group'. They include Ben Hartley, Labour candidate for Altrincham and Sale West, who said Brexit was 'utter folly'. Mr Hartley said last year he was 'embarrassed' to use the blue British passports issued in the wake of Brexit and said he would be happy 'to accept freedom of movement for all EU citizens provided migrants are employed, self-employed, studying or otherwise self-sufficient'. Fellow candidate Steve Race, who is standing for the party in Exeter, is among those looking to rejoin the EU at the first opportunity. He said last year: 'I campaigned to remain, I would like to see us rejoin in my lifetime. I will make the case within the Labour Party and continue to do so in the country.' Kirith Entwistle, who is standing for Labour in Bolton North East, suggested that Leave voters needed to be 'educated' about the EU. A number of former Red Wall MPs who lost their seats after Brexit have now been given the Labour Movement for Europe's backing to return, including Anna Turley in Redcar, Gareth Snell in Stoke-on-Trent Central, James Frith in Bury North and John Grogan in Keighley. All except Mr Snell backed a second Brexit referendum in 2019. Lee Anderson, deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, told the Mail: 'Sir Keir Starmer's handpicked candidates are actively campaigning to reverse Brexit. 'We already know Labour won't diverge from Brussels, so it's no surprise they're plotting to stuff Parliament with Remoaners and drag us back into the EU.' Stella Creasy, who chairs the Labour Movement for Europe, dismissed claims that the group will push to rejoin the EU. She said: 'It is not about rejoining, it is about rebuilding relationships with our neighbours for mutual gain.' Load-Date: December 30, 2023  End of Document
