   London shows its friendly face to citizens of EU countries CE Noticias Financieras English January 20, 2024 Saturday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 524 words Body   It has not come of its own accord, but is the result of pressure from a section of the press. But the British Government has shown its friendly face to citizens of EU countries who lived in the country before Brexit, and will consider the appeals to stay permanently (and be able to work) of those who through ignorance did not submit the application within the established deadlines. The decision of the Home Office responds to the publicity of cases such as that of a 34-year-old woman from Malaga who on December 26, after spending Christmas in Spain, was detained at Luton airport and put on a return plane because she lacked settled status , the equivalent of a lifetime residence permit that, within the Brexit agreements, London granted to citizens of EU countries who had been here for at least five years and made the relevant formalities before June 2021. Nearly six million Europeans living in the UK before Brexit have been granted residency status Almost six million Europeans (including 376,370 Spaniards) obtained settled status through an easy online procedure, but, as bureaucracy is bureaucracy, there were more complex cases, such as those who had not been in Great Britain for five consecutive years, but parties in two or more periods (such as the Malaga woman, who spent the pandemic in South Africa), or those who, in view of the fact that they already had permanent residence, thought they had the papers in order without the need to adapt them to the Brexit agreements with the European Union. Until last August, Home Office had quite a lot of leeway, but in the summer it adopted a stricter position and did not give the benefit of the doubt to anyone, which resulted in aberrations such as the cancellation of the bank accounts by Santander of an Italian catering businessman who had been living and paying taxes in the UK for twenty-one years, but had not applied for settled status thinking he did not need it. It is, on another scale, like the Jamaicans and natives of Caribbean countries who emigrated in the 1960s and 1970s without papers, as Commonwealth citizens, and have eventually been deported for lacking a British passport and being technically "illegal". After a campaign led by the pro-European newspaper The Guardian , disclosing the cases of the Italian and the Spanish, the Government has backtracked and announced that it will consider the appeals of those who, having a residence permit prior to Brexit, did not apply within the deadline for the application for settled status. It is not an automatic grant, but each one will have to explain the circumstances of their situation. EU tourists can access the UK, in the vast majority of occasions, simply with the electronic passport, without the need to talk to any customs agent. But sometimes the system does not work, and if the person concerned says they are living or coming to work in the UK without having settled status, problems can arise. Last year, border police refused entry to some 5,000 Europeans, mostly Romanians, Bulgarians and Poles. Britons with second homes in the EU complain that they cannot stay more than six months without a visa. Load-Date: January 21, 2024  End of Document
