   London mayor calls for reopening borders with Europe for young people CE Noticias Financieras English January 21, 2024 Sunday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 322 words Body   The mayor of London has called for a "youth mobility agreement" that allows the free movement of British and European youth as before Brexit. In statements published this Sunday by The Observer, Labour's Sadiq Khan has claimed that European youth can once again enjoy the advantages offered for their vital training expectations by freedom of movement on the continent, and thus reverse some of the economic and cultural damage caused, according to him, by the decision of the United Kingdom to disengage from the European Union. In statements that The Guardian, sister paper of The Observer, considers the most pro-European uttered by a Labour leader since 2016, Khan proposes the creation of a "youth mobility" charter with EU countries or the introduction of changes to the current visa rules, which restrict travel and the ability to be able to work in other EU countries. Changes that in his opinion "would benefit economically, culturally and socially" young people on both sides of the channel. In the case of the British, the rupture has not only limited their employment opportunities but also their academic opportunities, due to the abandonment of the Erasmus program. Khan is thus setting a pro-European agenda for his campaign for re-election in the municipal elections scheduled for May. Opposing him will be the pro-Brexit Conservative Susan Hall. He is also setting the position of his party for the debates that will lead to the review of the Brexit clauses agreed with the EU for 2025. Recent polls suggest that the majority of Britons consider the Brexit to have been a failure. Its consequences have been felt especially in an open, global capital like London. "The Government's hard Brexit has hurt all over London and it has been young people who have been hit hardest in many ways," laments its mayor in The Observer interview, who has nevertheless made it clear that "London is, and always will be, a European city." Load-Date: January 22, 2024  End of Document
