   Minister aims to lure scientists back to Horizon; Donelan to launch new year drive after signing post-Brexit deal to rejoin (EURO)96bn EU research scheme following hiatus in Britain's membership Financial Times (London, England) December 5, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 827 words Byline: GEORGE PARKER Body   Science secretary Michelle Donelan is to launch a "pump-priming" effort and marketing blitz to plug the UK's scientists back into the EU's (EURO)95.5bn Horizon scheme, after several years in the cold. Donelan was in Brussels yesterday to oversee the formal signing of the post-Brexit deal that will see Britain become an associate member of Horizon, the world's biggest multilateral research programme. Donelan said she wanted to quickly get back to the pre-Brexit situation, when British researchers led 25 per cent of the Horizon projects the UK was involved in. "I want to exceed that," she added. But the minister accepted that the hiatus in Britain's membership meant that a big effort was required to bring forward bids and revive collaborations under Horizon, whose current funding round runs from 2021-27. Speaking en route to Brussels, she announced the government would offer "pump priming to the tune of £10,000 per organisation" to help support bids, in association with scientific bodies. Donelan said it was not too late for Britain to lead projects in the current programme. "We believe this offers incredible value and we really want to maximise this opportunity," she said. "We managed to secure a good deal - let's not waste that now." Donelan, previously a marketing executive for World Wrestling Entertainment, now has the task of putting British science back at the heart of EU research collaboration and will launch a publicity campaign in the new year. She declined to say how much money the government would put into the PR push, but it will extend beyond Britain to EU member states to remind researchers across Europe that the UK is back in the scheme. She said it would cost "a sizeable amount". Donelan said she wanted to make sure that large and small businesses were also aware that they could receive fund- ing from the scheme, as well as elite universities and research institutions. Horizon Europe became a political pawn during post-Brexit negotiations between Britain and the EU; Brussels made it clear the UK could not rejoin until a toxic stand-off over Northern Ireland's trading position was resolved. Rishi Sunak, the Prime Minister, settled the Northern Ireland dispute in February, but was not convinced that Horizon was good value for money, not least because Britain would be rejoining as an associate member after the current funding round had begun. A deal was eventually signed in September, with Britain also participating in the Copernicus satellite observation project. It has refused to join Euratom, the EU's nuclear technology programme. Donelan noted that the government spent £1.4bn on supporting Horizon-related research as a "bridge" but admitted it was "really disappointing" that the scheme became embroiled in diplomatic horse-trading. Under its deal to rejoin Horizon, Britain will pay no financial contributions for the first three years of the current programme, which involves more than 40 countries working in areas from climate change and medicines to artificial intelligence. But British scientists can start bidding for grants immediately. These arrangements will in effect save the UK about (EURO)800mn in contributions. Britain will then contribute almost (EURO)2.5bn annually to Horizon but has obtained a slightly enhanced "clawback mechanism" to ensure it does not contribute more than it receives in grants. As a full member of Horizon when it was in the EU, the UK was free to extract more in grants than it contributed. Donelan said the government's marketing campaign would also be publicised by the EU using its networks to ensure a quick relaunch of relationships with the UK, which may have suffered in the post-Brexit period. She said the science sector had been adamant that Britain should rejoin Horizon rather than pursue the government's "Plan B", dubbed Pioneer, which would have built research collaborations worldwide. Some parts of Plan B would be retained, she said. The minister added that she was "not worried" there would be a shortage of good bids for British scientists to take advantage of its renewed membership as she wanted the UK to "overachieve". "Let's make the most of it and make sure everyone is aware of it," she said. "Despite the gap we have had, we have to make sure that people don't overlook it by mistake. We're not worried but it's about maximising the opportunity we have. She said a series of events would be run countrywide, including "workshops" to raise awareness of Horizon. "There will be some organisations and researchers who have got out of the habit of applying to Horizon. That's why we are going to actively promote and market the scheme." Iliana Ivanova, EU commissioner for innovation, research and culture, said: "This is a real milestone, a clear win-win for both sides and for global scientific progress. Together, we can push further and faster." Additional reporting by Andy Bounds in Brussels 'We believe this offers incredible value ' Michelle Donelan Graphic    Reset: Michelle Donelan, secretary of state for science, innovation and technology, in Brussels to sign the new deal Sarah Van Looy/FT Load-Date: December 4, 2023  End of Document
