   MPS ON BARGES, BREXIT FANTASIES AND BENEFIT MYTHS Metro (UK) August 21, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 12,13 Length: 730 words Body   ? As we all know, the buildings of the Houses of Parliament are in a parlous state. They need urgent repairs, but how to carry on governing the country in the meanwhile? Now that prime minister Rishi Sunak has assured us that the barges at Portland are perfectly adequate to house asylum seekers in large numbers, why not buy a couple more, moor them up at Westminster and decant the MPs et al into them while those repairs are carried out? When parliament is in recess, they can all sail down the Thames, inspecting water quality of rivers on the way and debating how to dispose of their effluent? Ann-Marie Simpson, Brundall, Norfolk ? There will be no long-term solution to the immigration 'problem' until the root causes are addressed. These are poverty, inequality, war and instability in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, parts of the Middle East and elsewhere. Simply concentrating on the small boats is like trying to deal with an overflowing bath tub by hurling towels on to the floor but without turning the taps off. Only a concerted international European effort will have any lasting effect. If only there was some kind of pan-European organisation we could join to work with… Peter Reynolds, Nottingham ? Leslie in Stourbridge (MetroTalk, Fri) is like the majority of Brexiteers in talking utter nonsense about the 'reason Brexit has failed', saying 'the EU and those in this country who wanted to remain have used every dirty trick they can think of to stop us leaving'. This right-wing government is made up entirely of Brexiteers - that is the reason it has failed. Everyone in government knows Brexit is bad for the UK but all of them are too 'frit' to admit it. And after all this, Brexiteers still want to blame the EU for the self-inflicted mess this country is in. Unbelievable. Martin, Epsom ? It certainly sounds like Leslie knows what they voted for - the fabulous Unicorn Brexit that was never possible. But cue the childish nonsense about a conspiracy to prevent the fantasy coming true. Sigh. Paperwork, duties, general hassle are inevitable consequences of being outside the EU, nothing more. Is Leslie still lost in their Brexit Dreamworld? How terribly sad. This is Reality Brexit. Liz, London ? Paul of London (MetroTalk, Wed) says a success of Brexit is that 'millions of people can no longer simply walk in and claim whatever they want'. Has he ever been to a JobCentre? I've had doctors have to write in because their double-amputee housebound diabetic patient (that is not an exaggeration) was declared 'fit to work' and had their benefits reduced to a pittance. Regardless of national origin, the idea that people can 'claim whatever' would sound like a bad joke if we didn't have so many people believing such utter rubbish. Rob Slater, Norfolk ? Paul says immigration was not the main motivation behind Brexit. He would be well-advised to base his opinions on actual facts. Surveys show that immigration was the most common reason people voted Leave. Gaining greater control of law-making was a less common reason but, of course, the main reason Brexiteers wanted this control was to limit immigration! Some joined-up thinking here would be sensible. Lastly, his outrageous conflation of workers from the EU, who help boost our economy, with those desperate people who arrive in small boats beggars belief. Rob, London n For Kathryn (and others, MetroTalk, Thu), the reason there are many young men (more than women and children) migrating is because this is what humans have always @MetroUK done. A young man is typically the most likely person in a family to survive the dangers of transit. He will establish himself with shelter and an income and then arrange a safe route for his family to follow. Where people are fleeing imminent danger, women and children do travel - as seen in the Mediterranean crossings, which tragically often end in disaster. Lastly, not every man wants to be drafted in a war or forced to fight. I'm sure many Ukrainian men would leave if they could to avoid being killed by the Russian war machine. Lewis Gibson, Birmingham n Congratulations, Metro, for your coverage of the immigration www.issues.No other newspaper has dealt with the matter in the very sensitive and intelligent way that you have done. Thank you so much. Scott, West London You are more likely to be   published if you provide your name and location with your comment Load-Date: August 21, 2023  End of Document
