   Nigel Farage becomes Led by Donkeys poster boy after damning Brexit admission dailyrecord.co.uk June 20, 2023 Tuesday 11:01 AM GMT  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: AYRSHIRE LIVE; Version:1 Length: 374 words Byline: By Ross Dunn Highlight: Nigel Farage features in the giant poster criticising the Brexit process he fought for. Body   An anti-Brexit campaign group has chosento be part of its latest political stunt. Led by Donkeys have put up a giant poster quoting former UKIP leader Nigel Farage. The simplistic poster depicts Farage with his quote "Brexit has failed" from a Newsnight interview last month. One of the main driving forces behind Britain's exit from the European Union, Farage has since said that Brexit hasn't been economically beneficially for the UK. The anti-Brexit guerrilla group has capitalised on Farage's admission and plastered it in 150 locations around the country. And one spot chosen by Led By Donkeys is the huge advertising billboard on Kilmarnock's Queen's Drive outside Kilmarnock Rugby Club and across from one of the town's major retail parks. Sharing a photo of one of the billboards, Led by Donkeys posted on Facebook: "150 of these posters are now up in towns and cities across Britain. Thanks to everyone who chipped in. We thought as many people as possible should see Nigel Farage’s damning verdict on Brexit - and so did you." Fire crews race to Crosshouse Hospital after car bursts into flames The stunt stemmed from Farage being asked if he thought the UK would have been better off had it remained part of the EU. He told Newsnight: “I don’t think that for a moment. But what I do think is we haven’t actually benefitted from Brexit economically. “I mean what Brexit has proved, I’m afraid, is that our politicians are about as useless as the commissioners in Brussels were. “We have mismanaged this totally and if you look at simple things, simple things such as takeovers, such as corporation tax, we are driving business away from our country. “Arguably, now we’re back in control, we’re regulating our own businesses even more than they were as EU members. Brexit has failed.” ead next: Scots whisky giants are given green light for new distillery operation in Ayrshire Eyesore site next to Ayrshire houses to be turned into car wash facility Name change and £500,000 makeover for popular bar after takeover Timeline on new Ayrshire super school unveiled as pupils set for post-summer holiday entry 'Negotiations' ongoing as cinema chain eyes up Ayr Odeon following shock closure General In Your Area Widget Don't miss the latest Ayrshire headlines – Load-Date: July 20, 2023  End of Document
