   NO BREXIT TEARS; Leave voters still back their decision Most say leaving EU will work out well The Sun (England) June 23, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 412 words Byline: JACK ELSOM Body   BREXIT voters overwhelmingly back their decision to Leave and are optimistic it will prove correct. A fresh poll silences EU luvvies claiming most who wanted out in 2016 have changed their mind. In fact, 72 per cent would vote Leave again, with just 16 per cent backing Remain. And 61 per cent say Brexit will work out in the long run, compared to 12 per cent who think it will flop. Disappointed Leavers say "ineffective" politicians are at fault for "giving in too much to the EU's demands". Although the country voted Leave by a 52 to 48 per cent margin seven years ago, Britain only broke free in 2021. Despite battling Covid and facing war in Europe, critics have blamed Brexit for many of the nation's woes. The survey of 4,000 people by Public First found if the referendum was re-run today featuring newly-enfranchised youngsters, Remain would win by 64 to 36 per cent. But it reveals that the idea swathes of Leave voters have "Bregrets" is "way overdone". Around 18 per cent feel Brexit has gone badly, with MPs bungling opportunities. Public First said: "Of those voters, far more are angry with politicians' failure to deliver than they are for taking us out in the first place. "Many Leave voters think politicians didn't really try to make Brexit work." Trust in politicians among Brexit voters is at rock bottom, with 88 per cent saying they have totally lost faith. In a warning shot for Rishi Sunak, disappointed Leavers are more likely to want a "competent new PM" to give Brexit a new lease of life. And 57 per cent of those who voted Leave and feel fury at politicians voted Tory in 2019 - but just 24 per cent would do so now. Mr Sunak has signed the Windsor Framework with the EU to reduce trade checks in Northern Ireland. But Leavers are more likely to believe the Northern Ireland Protocol is one of the elements that has gone badly. Rising immigration is also frustrating them. Some 39 per cent of Leavers said Brexit made no difference to border controls, while 36 per cent believe we have more. Ex-Brexit minister David Jones said: "People aren't stupid, they voted to recover their national sovereignty. "They also understand our current economic problems are shared across the world. "They know living in a free country is beyond price and that is why they are happy they voted Leave." lTODAY the London Mayor Sadiq Khan will light up City Hall in the colours of the EU flag to mark the referendum's anniversary. jack.elsom@thesun.co.uk The Sun Says - Page 12 Graphic    Victory ... Leave supporters cheer in 2016Vote day . . Sun page one Load-Date: June 23, 2023  End of Document
