   No money for A9, NHS and housing but plenty to waste on national parks Aberdeen Press and Journal February 6, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright 2024 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 30 Length: 1534 words Byline: Struan Nimmo Body   Sir, - I find it astonishing at this time of serious budget constraints to find out the Scottish Government seems to be determined to create at least one more national park (NP). No money for the A9 or the NHS or affordable housing, but plenty money to burn on more green vanity projects. The current models (Lomond and Cairngorms) are not at all popular with the people that have to live in these parks, and especially with rural workers, who fear their futures because of park objectives. Objectives that often have not been consulted upon by those the policy will affect and with no safety net for them when they lose their livelihoods and housing. And many of the original promises made 20 years ago are now forgotten. (The same promises being made in the consultations for these new national parks right now.) For the Cairngorms NP the annual budget for 2023-24 is £13.7 million. Approximately half of this goes on staff salaries and running costs (circa £6.7m) and a third on peatland restoration (£4.3m - a scheme to make rich land owners richer and allow companies to offset carbon emissions instead of reducing them, funded by you, the taxpayer.). I can only see less than £500,000 going in to tangible assets that might make visiting or staying in the park better. So for that large multi-million pound budget we just get an extra layer of bureaucracy, especially in planning, and then the pleasure of being told what to do by a bunch of expensive, academic desk jockeys with little local connection or empathy, indulging their desire to implement vanity projects that will not affect them or their descendants. A few carbon schemes here and there will not save the world but it will be the end of our world as we know it - our local cultural heritage or way of life. The local people, especially around the Highlands, do not want this waste of money and would far rather see these budgets (if the Scottish Government has spare cash) spent on things like community owned affordable housing projects where there would be far better value to the taxpayer and those local people who struggle now to find home. Rural workers do not want any more national parks but with the consultation process do not seem to be able to object and get heard. They certainly do not have an appetite for a second round of consultations wasting more taxpayers' money than has already been spent on the sometimes covert and flawed first round. There opinion is a big firm NO. I do wonder if it is all some big conspiracy and some sort of "boys club" (and girls) to create these cushy quango jobs for each other in the world of eco-superiority and green washing. I do wonder if the newly-formed Cairngorms Crofters and Farmers might not feel so neglected if they actually had an agricultural officer to serve their needs and actually consult with them? But it would seem at this critical time in relationships he is on "gardening leave", or something similar, running road shows and consultation events for a New Lochaber National Park. Much against the will of many locals. However a few councillors seem to be in favour because they are maybe looking at the circa £9,000+ a year they will receive from taking their seats on the NP "gravy train". I urge everyone concerned to write to all of their MSPs immediately on this subject to explain that national parks are not good value for money and from 20 years of experience already, not good for local people and communities. And explain that if the government persist with this tack they will lose lots of rural votes in the next elections, Westminster and Holyrood. Name and address supplied. Don't be fooled by claims backing UK Sir, - We are often told that we are economically more secure with the UK economy and it's "broad shoulders". We should not be fooled by this lie. After the deregulation of banking the UK government lost control of the currency. The City of London has created an enormous bubble of the currency. In Thatcher's time the collapse of the economy when the bubble burst was avoided only by the revenues from Scottish oil. Since then we have already paid, as taxpayers, for one collapse of the economy, and most recently Truss did her best to finish it off. The UK government landed us with a series of disastrous and expensive failed infrastructure schemes. The Post Office scandal. £60 billion for HS2. £300 million for the Rwanda scam. £80m for Brexit ferries. £10bn for a failed NHS IT scheme. And now we have the loss of British Steel in Wales after a Tory gift of £500m to Tata. The last thing Scotland needs is more of that sort of financial incompetence. Broad shoulders ? Yeah right! David Currie, Tarland. Inquiry releases stench of truth Sir, - Earlier at the UK Covid inquiry, former Deputy First Minister John Swinney revealed: "In my 16 years in the cabinet there wasn't a single vote on any single issue, because that's not how cabinet did its business. If a member of cabinet felt they could not go along with what had been agreed and collective responsibility had kicked in, that member would have to resign." Proof, direct from "the horse's mouth", that the Scottish Government cabinet is simply a vastly overpaid rubber stamp, there simply to fawn at the first minister, knowing having a contrary opinion would require one to resign. Combined with the non-minuted Gold Command meetings (classic Sturgeon), the culture of secrecy, deflection, contrived grievances and deleting of evidence, even the most ardent Nat must be smelling, if not the coffee, then the stench. These mostly talentless gravy-train addicted troughers, promoted due to their unswerving loyalty, as opposed to any ability they possess to do their job, wouldn't last five minutes in the private sector. I suspect that if many of them, including my own MSP Richard Lochhead, stayed in their beds for a month or two, no one would notice any difference. J Lawrence, Elgin. Let's see what weather brings Sir, - Did you know that Friday February 2 was Candlemass Day and an indication to what the weather holds in store for us? If Candlemass Day be mucky and foul half the winter's deen at yule, if Candlemass Day be sunny and fair half the winter's tae dee an mair. So let's see. Howard Fowlie, Drumoak. Why vote for a communist? Sir, - Your article regarding the call for a bust of Mick McGahey (January 29) was remiss in not mentioning that he was a staunch communist. His father, John McGahey, worked in the mines at Shotts, North Lanarkshire where Mick was born. Father John was a founder member of the Communist Party of Great Britain and took an active part in the 1926 General Strike. The family moved to Cambuslang in search of work, and it was here that McGahey went to school. McGahey started work at age 14 at the Gateside Colliery and continued to work as a miner for the next 25 years. He followed his father into the Communist Party and the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM), remaining a member of both the Communist Party, until its dissolution in 1990, and the NUM all his life. The person proposing this bust for a lifelong troublemaker is Yorkshire-born Richard Leonard, a politician who served as leader of the Scottish Labour Party from 2017 to 2021. He has been a Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP), as one of the additional members for the Central Scotland region, since 2016. He ideologically identifies as a socialist, democrat and internationalist. He also states that Mr McGahey was an internationalist. If this is Labour's way of relabeling a communist, then fine. I will read for internationalist, communist. So why would Labour supporters vote for a communist? Finlay G Mackintosh, Forres. Brexit the flawed ideology of Tories Sir, - The indomitable, albeit misguided, George Emslie unleashes another anti-EU diatribe (Letters, January 31). His yearning for the nativist purity of Brexit is palpable, his words screaming off the page. How dare Remainers stymie the flourishing of something so fine? How dare Johnny Foreigner steal our jobs? His passion lacks intellectual heft. This is unsurprising given that Brexit is a flawed ideology with no specified objective other than leaving the EU. Neither is the UK the idyll he believes it to be. Transparency International recently found that Britain, once the world's eighth most transparent country, had fallen to 20th and considered more corrupt than Uruguay. This may prompt Mr Emslie to revise his claim that the EU is "dodgy". Our economy has a structural dependence on immigration, so why the fuss? Sir John Curtice explained this is because the purpose of Brexit was to reduce immigration, and it's proved "spectacularly unsuccessful". An example of Tory obfuscation and distraction. Mr Emslie accuses the EU of "gleefully doing nothing to stop" the boats, ignoring the fact France offered to open a processing centre there. He should also note that both France and Germany take more asylum seekers than Britain. Is it any wonder that there is a clear majority of the electorate who believe that Brexit was bad for Britain? Mr Emslie, it's time to set aside your Brexiteer hubris and stop your "dodgy" and "toxic" blethering. Raise your game by proffering an opinion replete with supporting evidence. Credibility beckons! Ian D McCormick, Aboyne. Load-Date: February 6, 2024  End of Document
