   Northern Ireland trade deal pledges 'unfettered access' The Times (London) February 1, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 1265 words Byline: Oliver Wright Body   Ministers have announced plans to minimise checks of goods crossing between Britain and Northern Ireland under measures to allow powersharing to resume in the province. In an effort to break the political deadlock, the Westminster government has pledged to legislate this week to guarantee Northern Ireland's "unfettered access" to UK markets and safeguard its constitutional status as part of the United Kingdom. Ministers are symbolically rebranding the "green lanes" for goods crossing the Irish Sea to be sold in Northern Ireland as the "UK internal market system", which will govern the movement of goods remaining within the country. The measures are the result of months of negotiations between ministers and the Democratic Unionist Party, which has spent two years boycotting the power-sharing arrangement that guarantees a unionist and nationalist presence in the Northern Irish government. The new legislation will be approved by MPs today under a tight timetable, with the plan being to get power-sharing up and running by the end of the week. The legislation will be carefully scrutinised by critics of the DUP leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, who believe it is unlikely to meet their concerns. They worry that, because of Brexit, Northern Ireland will be forced to follow the EU's single-market rules while the rest of the UK will be free to diverge, making Irish reunification more likely. The Times has looked at the new proposals to examine their practical impact and the extent to which they meet unionists' concerns. affirming northern ireland's constitutional status This is largely symbolic, but MPs will be asked to pass secondary legislation restating parliament's sovereignty over all matters in Northern Ireland. This is designed to address concern that Northern Ireland's constitutional position in the Union has been weakened by Brexit. It will have no practical impact: Northern Ireland will continue to have to follow EU single-market rules - both existing and new - while the rest of the UK will be free to diverge. access to uk markets This will amend the UK's Internal Market Act to prohibit exit checks on goods moving from Northern Ireland to Great Britain. This was a particular concern of unionists as they feared it could put some Northern Ireland traders at a competitive disadvantage and symbolically suggested Northern Ireland was somehow different from the rest of the UK. However, the legislation merely formalises the arrangement struck between Britain and the EU as part of the Windsor Framework. There will also be a new law designed to prevent future governments reaching a new agreement with the EU, such as the Northern Ireland protocol, that could create further trade barriers with Britain. In reality no parliament can bind the hands of its successors - so again it is largely symbolic, and something that unionist critics of the plan are likely to seize on. 'green lane' rebrand Under the Windsor Framework goods crossing the Irish Sea would go through a green lane if they were destined to be sold in Northern Ireland or a red lane if they were to be transported to the Republic and the EU. The green lane will be rebranded the "UK internal market lane" as unionists felt that the concept of a green lane implied that Northern Ireland was not part of the UK's customs union. There will also be a guarantee that more than 80 per cent of all freight movements from Great Britain to Northern Ireland will take place under the UK internal market system without physical checks, apart from in exceptional circumstances. Again, these moves are largely symbolic and formalise promises made at the time of the Windsor Framework, when the government insisted that the vast majority of goods entering Northern Ireland would not be subject to physical checks. The rebranding merely puts this into a formal pledge. taking advantage of new british trade deals There had been concern that Northern Ireland could have missed out on the benefits of UK trade deals because it had to remain within the EU customs union. However, Brussels has now agreed across a range of products - including lamb - that Northern Ireland will be able to benefit from any reduced tariffs as a result of the UKnegotiated agreements. These products will now be able to move freely into Northern Ireland. This is something genuinely new, which can be used by Donaldson to show that he has made progress. The EU has also promised to keep the framework under review, which may reassure some critics of the deal. new labelling In a move that is likely to affect the whole of the UK, suppliers, manufacturers or retailers will have to label food and drink for the domestic market "Not for EU". At present this labelling only has to be in place for products sold in Northern Ireland. Unionists and retailers in Northern Ireland were concerned that having to create different labels might discourage smaller firms from sending their products to Northern Ireland. This is a small but tangible change which Donaldson can point to as a victory. preventing divergence The other big concern of unionists is that as time goes on Britain will diverge further from existing EU rules, while Northern Ireland has no choice but to abide by them. There will now be a legal requirement by the government to assess whether any new British legislation would impact trade between Northern Ireland and Great Britain and, if so, to make a statement considering those impacts on Northern Ireland's place in the UK's internal market. Ministers could undertake such an assessment and accept that it would put up barriers to trade, but carry on regardless. It is a safeguard of sorts, but it will not convince hardline critics. Analysis T o describe the package of measures that ministers have set out to appease unionist concerns over Northern Ireland's post-Brexit future as window dressing would be unfair. But only just (Oliver Wright writes). There were always going to be strict limits on how much the government could unilaterally offer the Democratic Unionist Party beyond what was agreed with the European Union in last year's Windsor Framework. What the package amounts to is more reassurance that Westminster will pay greater heed to the interests and concerns of Northern Ireland than altering an agreement that was already on the table. But that doesn't mean that the proposals are without interest, merit or some practical consequence. It requires the government to systematically assess the impact on Northern Ireland of all future laws taking advantage of "Brexit freedoms". There are also the commitments to giving Northern Irish companies "unfettered access" to both the UK and EU markets. Yet in some ways the most striking thing is not the practicalities of trade flows but the emphasis it places on symbolism. There will be a new statutory guarantee of Northern Ireland's constitutional position as an "integral part of the United Kingdom" both politically and economically. It will confirm the UK parliament is sovereign over all matters in Northern Ireland, and that executive authority is, and can only be, exercised by "His Majesty's Government or the Northern Ireland's executive in accordance with law". Critics will say that such words are essentially meaningless as no parliament can bind the hands of its successors. But for unionists, symbolism has always mattered and such statements of intent are critical. And while it may be window-dressing, it looks set to be enough to restore devolved government to the province and even lay to rest the traumas of Brexit. That is something entirely tangible. Graphic    Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, leader of the DUP, and Chris Heaton-Harris, the Northern Ireland secretary, right, at Hillsborough Castle with the proposals to unlock the Stormont deadlock over trading rulesPAUL FAITH/AFP/GETTF IMAGES Load-Date: February 1, 2024  End of Document
