   Northern Ireland gets first Sinn Fein leader – but functioning Stormont could prevent reunification telegraph.co.uk February 2, 2024 Friday 1:45 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:1 Length: 752 words Byline: By James Crisp, Europe Editor Highlight: Michelle O’Neill’s victory is not as complete as it might appear Body   Sinn Fein will claim the role of First Minister of Northern Ireland for the first time in the region’s 103-year history on Saturday. Power-sharing returns to Stormont after the DUP ended its two-year boycott  over post Brexit trading arrangements. The DUP won concessions in its Irish Sea border deal  with the Government but Sinn Fein has its eyes on a greater prize. It dreams of a reunited Ireland, which the party’s leader this week said was “within touching distance”  as she hailed a moment of “great significance”. Michelle O’Neill, Sinn Fein’s vice-president, won a historic victory in Northern Ireland Assembly elections in May 2022, a month after the DUP walked out of Stormont. She was entitled to the role of First Minister  but could not take it up because the DUP, which was toppled as the region’s dominant political force, continued its border boycott. The Assembly is run on a mandatory coalition between the biggest nationalist and unionist party, which is the DUP. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson’s party will name the Deputy First Minister after a speaker for the new Assembly is elected on Saturday. Nothing can be achieved in Stormont unless both senior ministers agree. Apart from the title, the two posts are more or less identical. But the role of First Minister is laden with added meaning, especially now. Brexit pushed reunification into mainstream debate in Northern Ireland, which voted Remain in the 2016 Brexit referendum. Historically nationalist Catholics now outnumber traditionally unionist Protestants, although many are too young to vote, according to the last census. Ms O’Neill followed up her Assembly election victory with another triumph in local elections , a year later. The General Election this year will be closely watched to see if Sinn Fein makes it a hat trick of wins by claiming more Westminster seats than the Brexit-backing DUP. In the Republic, Sinn Fein outperformed its own expectations at the last election and has a healthy lead in the polls ahead of a general election expected this year.  There is a very real prospect of Sinn Fein in government in both jurisdictions on the island of Ireland. Victories at the ballot box carry additional weight when viewed in the context of the Belfast/Good Friday Agreement. It states that the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland must call a border poll on Irish unity if it “appears likely” a majority want a united Ireland. Sinn Fein’s leadership have suggested the twin votes in the North and South of Ireland could happen by 2030. In this context, Ms O’Neill’s coronation, with a DUP politician as her deputy, is another humiliation in the psychodrama unionism has endured in recent years. But her victory is not as complete as it might appear. Sinn Fein beat the DUP by two seats in 2022 at a time when unionism was badly fractured over Brexit and borders. Sir Jeffrey lost support to hardline unionists and to the centrist Alliance party. Sinn Fein, now a streamlined vote-winning machine, knows this. Ms O’Neill’s polished campaign focused on issues like the cost of living and the NHS rather than ending partition. Stormont has been mothballed for about 10 of the 25 years since the end of the Troubles. Such dysfunctional politics led to dropping support for devolution and rising support for Irish unity.  The boycott delayed vital action on the longest hospital waiting lists in the UK’s poorest region. While Westminster imposed painful budget cuts during the deadlock, Ireland invested some of its healthy budget surplus in projects in the north. But extensive research by the Irish Times and ARINS found the “appears likely” threshold is nowhere near being met in Northern Ireland. Half of Northern Irish people said they would vote to remain in the UK if there was a border poll over two years of the survey. A third favoured Irish unity. Ms O’Neill insists she will be a “First Minister for all”. A successful term in office could increase “don’t know” voters’ trust in Sinn Fein and help sanitise the former political wing of the IRA. But she won’t convince the many unionists who backed Sir Jeffrey’s Stormont boycott or those who believe it has been a success. “Soft” or pragmatic unionists are unlikely to react to the return of some much-needed political stability with a sudden desire for controversial constitutional change. Sinn Fein might like to view the restoration of Stormont and the role of First Minister as a launchpad for reunification. But it could easily be the moment the impetus towards Irish unity begins to lose steam. Load-Date: February 2, 2024  End of Document
