   Northern Ireland trade deal set to end political deadlock thetimes.co.uk January 31, 2024 Wednesday 2:15 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 1435 words Byline: Oliver Wright, Policy Editor Highlight: It is hoped that new (and often symbolic) trade laws will allow power sharing between the DUP and Sinn Fein to resume Body   Northern Ireland has a brighter future, Rishi Sunak declared, as ministers announced measures allowing unionist and nationalist politicians to share power for the first time in two years. Under proposals that look set to break the political deadlock, the government will legislate on Thursday to reassure unionists about Northern Ireland’s post-Brexit future as an integral part of the United Kingdom. There will also be practical commitments on the level of checks needed on goods crossing the Irish Sea.  The deal is the culmination of months of private negotiations between Downing Street and the  Democratic Unionist Party  and should finally lead to the party re-entering power-sharing with Sinn Fein as soon as this weekend.  Ministers hope it will end more than seven years of bitter disputes over Northern Ireland’s status after the  Brexit  referendum upended the delicate political balance of the Good Friday peace agreement.  Sunak said that the deal would end rule from Westminster and the political stasis which has meant thousands of public sector workers have not received a pay rise in two years.  “There is now a prospect of giving people the local, accountable government that they need, and offering a brighter future for Northern Ireland,” he said. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, paid tribute to Sunak, contrasting his efforts to secure a deal with Boris Johnson who had “promised us a lot of things” but “didn’t deliver them”. “I believe in giving credit where it is due. Credit to Rishi Sunak. I think he delivered where others haven’t,” he said. The Times view on the Stormont deal: Hope for Northern Ireland Donaldson faces opposition from some hardliners in his party over agreeing to a plan that still has Northern Ireland following EU single market rules. “When the Northern Ireland assembly sits, ministers and assembly members will be expected by law to adhere to and implement laws which are made in Brussels, which they had no say over and no ability to amend, and no ability to stop,” the DUP MP Sammy Wilson said. “This is a result of this spineless, weak-kneed, Brexit-betraying government refusing to take on the EU and its interference in Northern Ireland.” Donaldson claimed that his critics, including the rival Traditional Ulster Voice party, did not want to see power-sharing restored and lived in a bygone era. “I can demonstrate very clearly what we have delivered and it’s there for everyone to read,” he said. “My question to my critics is: what have you delivered? What change have you secured?” The government has pledged to legislate this week to guarantee Northern Ireland’s “unfettered access” to UK markets and to underline its constitutional status as part of the United Kingdom. What does the DUP deal mean for Northern Ireland? Ministers are symbolically rebranding the so-called “green lanes” for goods crossing the Irish Sea to be sold in Northern Ireland as a new “UK internal market system” that will govern the movement of goods remaining within the country. There will also be a new obligation on the government to formally assess the impact of post-Brexit legislation on Northern Ireland’s place in the UK’s economic union. Some Tory Brexiteers expressed concern that Northern Ireland would still have to follow EU rules while the rest of the UK could diverge. Theresa Villiers, the former Northern Ireland secretary, called on ministers to continue negotiating with the EU “so that we can restore democratic control over law-making in every part of our United Kingdom”. Sir William Cash asked what was being done to ensure the UK government could “remove or veto the imposition of EU laws on Northern Ireland”. Chris Heaton-Harris, the Northern Ireland secretary, said that the agreement was “the right deal for Northern Ireland and the right deal for the Union”. “It strengthens and further protects the UK internal market and the Union, both now and in the long term,” he added.  No routine checks on goods — what the Northern Ireland power-sharing deal means The Times has looked at the new proposals. What, if anything, will be their practical impact, and to what extent do they meet the concerns of unionists? Affirming Northern Ireland’s constitutional status This is largely symbolic, but MPs will be asked to pass secondary legislation restating parliament’s sovereignty over all matters in Northern Ireland. This is designed to address concern that Northern Ireland’s constitutional position in the Union has been weakened by Brexit. It will have no practical impact: Northern Ireland will continue to have to follow EU single-market rules — both existing and new — while the rest of the UK will be free to diverge. Law guaranteeing ‘unfettered’ access to UK markets  This will amend the UK’s Internal Market Act to prohibit exit checks on goods moving from Northern Ireland to Great Britain. This was a particular concern of unionists as they feared it could put some Northern Ireland traders at a competitive disadvantage and symbolically suggested Northern Ireland was somehow different from the rest of the UK. However, the legislation merely formalises the arrangement struck between Britain and the EU as part of the  Windsor framework . There will also be a new law designed to try to prevent future governments from reaching a new agreement with the EU, such as the  Northern Ireland protocol , which could create further trade barriers with Britain. But in reality no parliament can bind the hands of its successors — so again it is largely symbolic, and something that unionist critics of the plan are likely to seize on. ‘Green lane’ rebrand  Under the Windsor framework goods crossing the Irish Sea would either go through a green lane because they were destined to be sold in Northern Ireland or a red lane if they were to be transported to the Republic and the EU. The green lane will be be rebranded the “UK internal market lane” as unionists felt that the concept of a green lane implied that Northern Ireland was not part of the UK’s customs union. There will also be a guarantee that more than 80 per cent of all freight movements from Great Britain to Northern Ireland will take place under the UK internal market system without physical checks apart from in exceptional circumstances. Again, these moves are largely symbolic. At the time of the Windsor framework the government insisted that the vast majority of goods entering Northern Ireland would not be subject to physical checks and the rebranding merely puts this into a formal pledge. Allowing Northern Ireland to take advantage of new British trade deals There had been concern that Northern Ireland could have missed out on the benefits of UK trade deals because it had to remain formally within the EU customs union. However, Brussels has now agreed across a range of products — including lamb — that Northern Ireland will be able to benefit from any reduced tariffs as a result of the UK-negotiated agreements. These products will now be able to move freely into Northern Ireland.  This is something genuinely new, which can be used by the DUP leader Sir Jeffrey Donaldson to show that in some areas he has made tangible progress on the original provisions of the Windsor framework. The EU has also promised to keep the framework under review, which could also reassure some critics of the deal. New labelling In a move that is likely to affect the whole of the UK, suppliers, manufacturers or retailers will have to label food and drink for the domestic market “ Not for EU ”. At present this labelling only has to be in place for products sold in Northern Ireland. The reason for the change is that unionists and retailers in Northern Ireland were concerned that having to create different labels might discourage smaller firms from sending their products to Northern Ireland. This is a small but tangible change which Donaldson can point to as a victory. Preventing further divergence The other big concern of unionists is that as time goes on Britain will diverge further from existing EU rules, while Northern Ireland has no choice but continue to abide by them. As part of a new safeguard there will be a legal requirement by the government to assess whether any new British legislation would impact trade between Northern Ireland and Great Britain and, if so, to make a statement considering those impacts on the operation of Northern Ireland’s place in the UK’s internal market. In future ministers could undertake such an assessment and accept that it would put up new barriers to trade, but carry on regardless. It is a safeguard of sorts, but not something that will convince hardline critics. Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
