   Not a total disaster - my four positives from a rough year Irish Independent December 30, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 28 Length: 653 words Byline: EUROPEAN EYE Body   Few will be upset to see this year disappear, and most of us will hope 2024 brings far less human suffering than we have witnessed over the past 12 months. But as we bid 2023 a rather flat farewell, let's reflect on four positive things in Europe that gave us hope. Poland and the return of Ireland's Brexit friend Poland's parliamentary election in October tops my small good news list, not least because it led to the return of Donald Tusk as prime minister. He was a staunch supporter of Ireland when he was EU Council president during Brexit, delivering many harsh truths to London. Tusk's return ended eight years of right-wing nationalist government that damaged the Polish rule of law and also hurt EU relations, especially links with Germany. Huge challenges lie ahead for Tusk's new centrist government, but the election showed that the rise of hardright governments in the EU is not universal and voters can ditch illiberal administrations. It is also encouraging that the transfer of power has been peaceful. The Polish outcome put a further strain on the EU's already pressured relations with Hungary's Viktor Orban, who is constantly at loggerheads with Brussels. This and other developments further diminish the political influence of the Visegrad Four - the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland and Hungary. Italy's far-right leader who went mainstream Also in October, Giorgia Meloni marked one year in office as Italy's first female prime minister and the first far-right government since that of Benito Mussolini. But by the end of her first year there was agreeable surprise in Brussels and other EU capitals at Meloni's largely positive and mainstream approach to foreign policy, especially her strong support for Ukraine. So far, migration remains a sore point for Meloni, and she has publicly criticised EU allies over this. But she has withdrawn Italy from controversial cooperation on China's Belt and Road Initiative and she appears determined that her government should adhere closely to the G7, the EU and Nato on foreign policy. Spain's unexpected win for socialist Sanchez and hard-right reverses Few believed Pedro Sanchez's big gamble would pay off when he fixed Spanish elections for July 23. The polls made gloomy reading for him - but he kept on battling and polled well. It took him until November 16 to pull together a coalition, largely by granting a controversial amnesty to Catalan nationalists, which has triggered a backlash. Sanchez's shaky government faces huge challenges next year, but he cannot be so easily written off after his election performances, which saw him successfully call out far-right opponents over climate change and gender equality. The reverses for the hard-right Vox Party were a pleasing aspect of the election. Another was the positive EU approach of the new Madrid government. Spanish politics is volatile, and anything could happen there next year - but for now the news is good. Exit Boris and enter the shape of a final Brexit fix Last June, Boris Johnson resigned from politics after an inquiry found he had misled parliament about parties thrown in Downing Street during the Covid pandemic. This was almost a year after he had been forced out of 10 Downing Street after a series of mishandled issues, including the pandemic allegations. Johnson's exit was a rare good day for politics on this island. He will be remembered here for mendacity over Brexit in his relationships with Irish politicians on both sides of the Border. Months before Johnson's final enforced exit, the EU and UK finally agreed a Brexit fix on trade for Northern Ireland. Granted, the DUP is still saying "No" to the Windsor Framework, but time is moving on and there is light in the hitherto pitch-black Brexit tunnel. Let's hope next year brings a Labour government in London and a new practical, grown-up UK-EU relationship, which would be of huge benefit to Ireland, Britain and Europe. Load-Date: December 30, 2023  End of Document
