   Paul McLennan MSP column: Survey reveals farmers- concerns over Brexit East Lothian Courier July 7, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 411 words Byline: Paul McLennan Body   LAST Saturday, I had a stall at the Haddington Show to listen to farmers and suppliers. East Lothian has over 180 farms. Last week, Farmers Weekly asked the question: How did farmers feel about Brexit in 2017? Conducted in late May and early June 2023, the survey attracted more than 900 responses, covering all sectors and including those who work on farms, as well as those from elsewhere in the industry. Asked whether they believed Brexit had had a positive or negative effect on the UK economy, the overriding sentiment was negative, about three-quarters of all respondents feeling that way. And asked about the state of their own businesses due to Brexit, a similar picture emerged, with 69 per cent saying it had been either -fairly negative- or -very negative-. Increased red tape, a worsening economic situation, damaging free-trade deals, a trail of broken promises - it seems that farmers and those working in the ancillary industries are far from satisfied with Brexit. Looking at how this has panned out between different sectors of farming, it is clear that the old adage -up corn, down horn- does not apply - both arable farmers and livestock farmers seem equally disappointed. According to the survey, some 70 per cent of the farmers who grow cereals said Brexit had been negative for their businesses, while 76 per cent of oilseed rape growers felt that way; 68 per cent of farmers with beef cattle, dairy cows or sheep had a negative perception. Perhaps not surprisingly, the two sectors that were even more negative were those growing vegetables (81 per cent) and those keeping pigs (79 per cent). Both have been especially hard hit by the reduced availability of pickers and slaughterhouse workers, who used to comprise a significant part of the workforce before Brexit limited their ability to work in the UK. Clearly, farm businesses have been affected by more than just Brexit over the past seven years - the pandemic, political upheavals in Westminster and the war in Ukraine have all played a major part. But fallout from that 2016 referendum has been considerable. The vast majority (83 per cent) said Brexit has been worse than expected. There was also a degree of enthusiasm to hold another referendum and rejoin the EU, with just over half (52 per cent) supporting such a move. Failing that, 70 per cent of farmers surveyed felt that the UK should at least rejoin the single European market. In Scotland, the only party advocating rejoining is the SNP. Load-Date: August 30, 2023  End of Document
