   Post-Brexit nostalgia: the economic crisis mobilizes the opinion of the British in favor of returning to the European Union. CE Noticias Financieras English August 29, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1452 words Body   In 2016, the main voices of Brexit promised to "regain sovereignty" and turn the United Kingdom into a new commercial and financial power, which would be a hub and hinge for Western economies with the world. Today, seven years later, the reality is the opposite. The most positive estimates suggest that its economy is 2% or 3% smaller than it would have been if it had not left the European Union (some $80 billion). Meanwhile, the most negative ones estimate that it could be 5% and that GDP per capita is $1,200 lower than it would have been if they had remained. In this context, a strong Europeanist current is emerging among King Charles III's subjects, with a large part of them even calling for a new referendum in the short term. "Given that the British economy was so integrated into the single market, practically all sectors have been affected by the Brexit," explains Luke Bartholomew, Senior Economist at Abrdn to CincoDías. According to the expert, export industries, in general, have been negatively affected, as it is more difficult for them to trade with the European Union (EU) and maintain their place within complex inter-EU value chains, where goods cross borders several times as part of production processes. The financial sector has also been affected by the loss of access to the European passport and other aspects of the single market for services. However, for the moment the blow to the has not been as severe as feared. "UK exports of financial services to the EU have fallen by more than 15%, but some of this fall has been offset by other markets. This has helped to keep the sector above 8% of GDP, and job losses lower than expected. The Edinburgh reforms are modest, but they take advantage of the UK's new regulatory freedom," says Bartholomew. However, Abrdn points out that investment has been much weaker, a situation that has weighed on demand and led to lower capital formation that will weaken future growth. "Lower growth has hurt the government's financial position, which ultimately means higher taxes and lower public spending over time. It is possible that the UK could offset some of the Brexit losses with a more efficient regulatory regime and trade policy with the rest of the world, but so far there is little sign that these potentially positive effects will materialize," the expert explains. The pharmaceutical sector has also been hit by the loss of market scale brought about by the existence in the UK of an independent regulatory framework, Abrdn points out. Similarly, agriculture has been affected by the loss of access to labor thanks to the free movement of people. "Primarily they have lost the opportunity to access the single market and so many UK companies are moving their headquarters to Europe. Businesses now have a real problem in terms of exports and imports. For example, their farmers' association says that food has already become 6% more expensive and is going to continue to become more expensive. There is going to be very strong pressure on the food sector. It is quite common to be able to maintain business activity, but in very difficult conditions," says Juan Ignacio Navas, managing partner of Navas y Cusí Abogados, a law firm specializing in European Union law. Likewise, the Brexit has also disproportionately affected small and medium-sized companies. "The manufacturing sector was cut off from its main trading partner by increased tariff and non-tariff barriers, further reducing its small weight in the UK's economic output to below 10%. Small businesses had less flexibility to adapt, saw their numbers fall to their lowest level in six years, but still employ 59% of the workforce," Ben Laidler, global markets strategist at eToro tells this newspaper. European nostalgia Regret emerges even among some who voted in favor of Brexit. According to a recent YouGov poll, a majority of Britons (55%) say that, if the referendum on the EU were held now, they would vote to remain in. Also, 26% think a referendum on the issue should be held before the end of 2023 and 39% think it should be held within the next five years. "A large majority of younger voters are pro-European and this will only increase as time goes on and Brexit causes more and more damage to our economy and individual opportunities," Nick Harvey, chief executive of European Movement UK, a transpartisan and pro-European British organization with 21,000 militants over 270,000 supporters, replies to FiveDay. Responses compiled by the aforementioned poll also indicate that, if a new referendum were called, 51% of Britons would vote to rejoin, compared with 32% who would vote to stay out. "This is a substantial change from early 2021, at which point Britons were split 40% against joining the EU and 42% in favor. Back then, 8% of Brexit voters would have voted to rejoin; now 18% would," indicate YouGov. "UK citizens have lost all the rights and opportunities of EU citizenship: among other things, the right to work, study and retire in Europe, the right to go on vacation without long queues at the borders, and the right to EU environmental protection; for example, since Brexit, UK rivers and beaches have suffered large increases in sewage discharges," says Mark English, spokesman for European Movement UK. Precisely, the great dissatisfaction is also due to the mountain of bureaucracy that Britons, both at home and abroad, have to endure after Brexit. "Boris Johnson set his own date for leaving the EU, and to meet it they didn't negotiate or think through a lot of the issues. Since then we have been suffering," says Anne Hernandez, president of the Brexpats in Spain association, a collective of British nationals formed in 2016 to deal with the difficulties of Brexit. "For example, some of us have been waiting for a year to register for Spanish social security. Older people sometimes don't understand technology or Spanish. In their case it is much more difficult and it is very complicated to take out private insurance being over 70. It is also much more difficult for people who have set up or want to set up businesses here. There are even problems with the credentials of the disabled or renewing a driver's license," explains Hernández. Is it viable to return? The experts consulted agree that it is viable for the United Kingdom to return to the European Union. However, if this situation were to occur, the British would have to apply like any other country. In this context, a process would have to be initiated similar to the one that countries such as Ukraine, Albania, Moldova or Montenegro are currently going through. However, the eventual path back to the union will not necessarily be straightforward. "As the UK left the EU on January 31, 2020, it is now considered a third country under EU law. If it ever wanted to rejoin, it would do so through the framework established by Article 49. But this is only part of the membership process. The 1993 Copenhagen criteria also describe some of the requirements for EU membership. Candidate states may also be subject to other specific conditions," say experts from the British think tank Institute for Government (IFG). From IFG they state that possibly the UK would have to meet some additional requirements. "Joining the Euro area and Schengen are requirements for new member states, although Denmark has the option to opt out of the Euro and Ireland has the option to opt out of Schengen. Croatia, Cyprus, Romania and Bulgaria have not yet joined the Schengen area, but are legally obliged to do so," says Georgina Wright, IFG researcher. Wright also stresses that, in addition, London would have to renegotiate all the rebates and exclusions it had when it was an EU member, but this time from a position of disadvantage. "They would have to reapply like any other country and absolutely everything would have to be renegotiated. They are outside and have no privileges. The process would be complex, which could take years, although it could be less than ten. I see it as viable, but with many difficulties because of the way they left and because of how damaged relations have been. Perhaps additional things would be asked of them, such as joining the Euro or providing compensation for the time they have been out," Juan Ignacio Navas explains to this newspaper. "The UK will come forward and the EU will want the UK back, but only when there is a large consistent majority of UK voters in favor, for a significant amount of time. Enough to make it clear that Brexit will not happen again! So there's not much point in speculating now about the detailed process," opines Nick Harvey. The truth is that, despite this, none of the main parties have raised a return to the EU club. Load-Date: August 30, 2023  End of Document
