   Reform's 'cast iron' pledge to fight Tories; Reform's 'cast iron' pledge to fight Tories The Sunday Times (London) December 24, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, Northern Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,2 Length: 673 words Byline: Harry Yorke Body   The leader of Reform UK has privately given his senior team "castiron guarantees" that general election candidates will not be told to step aside for Tory opponents in a move that could split Rishi Sunak's vote in key seats. Richard Tice has offered written assurances to key party figures that they will fight the Conservatives right up to polling day. Reform has already selected candidates for 440 seats and intends to stand in all constituencies bar those in Northern Ireland. It fought the 2019 general election as the Brexit Party, led by Nigel Farage, changing its name afterwards. It posed a significant threat to Boris Johnson's chances of winning a majority ? until Farage decided to stand down 317 candidates to help ensure Jeremy Corbyn did not secure the keys to Downing Street. While Farage said he had put country before party, it caused anger among many Brexit Party candidates and supporters. Tice, who took over as leader from Farage ? currently Reform's honorary president ? has vowed not to repeat the move next year. He has given "concrete" assurances in writing to members of his top team and several parliamentary candidates who have been recently recruited. They include Ann Widdecombe, the former Conservative minister who is now- Reform's spokeswoman on immigration, and Ben Habib, a deputy leader. The commitment was intended to convince many of the party's high-profile figures that it is serious about the next election. Several, including Habib and Widdecombe, are former Brexit Party MEPs who have rejoined since the promises. Tice said: "We will be ready whenever it comes, spring, summer or autumn. We will be standing in seats everywhere in England, Scotland and Wales. Many, including Tory MPs and commentators, still don't believe us, but I have news for them: you are seriously underestimating our intent to have a massive impact." Tice's tactics pose a serious headache for Sunak, whose party trails Labour by as much as 20 points in the polls and appears to be heading towards a landslide defeat. Reform is polling at about 9 per cent and Conservative MPs fear it threatens to erode their vote further. While the numbers suggest it will not take seats directly from the Tories, it could steal enough votes to hand dozens of tight marginals to Labour. In the mid-Bedfordshire and Tamworth by-elections, the number of votes cast for Reform was more than the Labour majority. Analysis by the think tank More in Common suggests Reform could cost the Tories 35 seats in the north and Midlands. Reform's popularity is expected to grow in the new year, amid speculation that Farage is preparing to return to frontline politics after his stint on I'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here!. He and Tice have been speaking regularly since his return from Australia and are expected to discuss Farage's "future role" in Reform over the next few days. Tice is to hold a press conference on January 3, outlining Reform's plans, and Farage would not say whether he will attend. Tice is expected to use the event to ratchet up his attacks on the Conservatives while appealing to pro-Brexit voters in red wall seats, who are reluctant to return to Labour. To convince former Brexit Party figures to rejoin, a senior source said that Tice had give each an individual written commitment. This included promising that big decisions on campaigning will not be made unilaterally. Widdecombe said: "The situation is completely different now. In 2019 if we had not stood down Labour could have won and there was a real chance that Brexit could have been overturned. This time Brexit has been done, at least legally." Tice has made clear internally that the party will contest 630 seats across Britain, excluding Northern Ireland. Senior party figures believe that if Farage does return to the front line, its popularity will grow further. "My gut feeling is if Farage was properly engaged, 8.5 per cent [in the polls] would become 13 per cent overnight," one said. It would mean a Tory wipeout, the source added."That's exactly what we want." Load-Date: December 24, 2023  End of Document
