   Regretful Brits: "Brexit was a very big mistake". CE Noticias Financieras English September 25, 2023 Monday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 388 words Body   Thousands of European Union nostalgics demonstrated Saturday in London in favor of the United Kingdom's return to the bloc left after Brexit. A poll indicates that the majority of Britons want to return. To the tune of The Yellow Submarine by the Beatles, but with a refrain where you hear "We are all in the Tragedy of Brexit", began this Saturday the pro-European march in London with thousands of people coming from all over England like this couple from Sheffield. "We got up at 6 a.m. and it took us four hours to come on a coach with anti-Brexit chants," he explains to one of the marchers. Despite the thrashing of the journey, he those with him felt they had to be here. "Because I am a patriot and I believe in the future of this country and I believe that the future of this country means being closer to our neighbors, our friends and our trading partners in Europe," another man assures. "In the next general election we have to kick out the Conservatives because they are criminals," adds a woman. Many people were here in protest because since Brexit the country entered an economic crisis and the quality of life of citizens has deteriorated. "It's really depressing that our country has isolated itself at a time when we should be working with our partners and our neighbors to deal with the problems we have," argues a young woman. "I think Brexit was a very big mistake that we were led into by a corrupt government that just wanted to line their pockets" abounds an older man. Polls say that 64% of Britons would vote to remain in the European Union in a new referendum. But says the 67-year-old that they are not asking for another referendum. "I think there would be no need for a referendum, just to go back in. The economic and political pressure will be so great that whoever is in power, probably Labour with the support of the Liberal Democrats, will have no choice but to ask for entry first as an associate member and then as a full member," he says. Another of the 70-year-old protesters recalls that this week Labour leader and pro-European, Kir Starmer, the big favorite for next year's election, has said he wants to be close to the European Union. "Starmer will be under pressure from the views he has previously expressed to have a closer relationship with the European Union," believes another Europeanist. Load-Date: September 26, 2023  End of Document
