   Rishi must reform or he'll lose the election The Express November 29, 2023 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: FEATURES; OPINION, COLUMN; Pg. 13 Length: 356 words Byline: Ann Widdecombe Body   A S REFORM UK hovers around 11 per cent in the polls, a rattled Rishi Sunak tells voters that if they vote Reform (the old Brexit Party), all they will do is let Keir Starmer in.Well, that was an argument that was put to the Brexit Party in 2019 and we're unlikely to fall for it again. Of course, the threat then was not a weak and vacillating Starmer but an all too purposeful and extreme Jeremy Corbyn. So, with Boris promising to "get Brexit done", the Brexit Party stood down every candidate in a Conservative seat, thus delivering Boris an 80-seat majority for which he gave us neither thanks nor acknowledgement. We would cheerfully have put up with being ignored if Brexit had indeed been done, but it wasn't. The deal meant effectively leaving Northern Ireland in the EU and as if that were not bad enough, there was no bonfire of the regulations and instead of competing with the EU the Government has shadowed it, raising instead of lowering corporation tax for example. The King's first state visit was not to the Commonwealth but to Germany. We pay France millions to do nothing to stop the boats and in a final gesture of utter contempt, so blatant as to amount to a reverse victory sign, Sunak brings back as Foreign Secretary the man who used his premiership to promote the lies of Project Fear in an attempt to scare Brexit voters off, who fled the scene when we won and who is now using his new position to cosy up to the EU in defence among other matters. B REXIT? What darn Brexit? And that of course is not all. We have record tax levels under a supposedly Conservative government, record levels of immigration and record levels of crime.Woke is everywhere and the state has never intruded so much in our lives. Conservatives? What Conservatives? Vote blue, get bright pink. Finally, there is the sheer chaos of a party continually immersed in civil war, leadership challenges and open briefing of the press against www.ministers.No sane citizen could easily vote for so undisciplined a rabble. Reform alone offers real change and a return to basic common sense. If Sunak is wise he will learn from that before it is too late. Load-Date: November 29, 2023  End of Document
