   Routine trade checks ditched in new NI deal The Courier February 1, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 19 Length: 559 words Byline: DAVID YOUNG, JONATHAN MCCAMBRIDGE, RICHARD WHEELER ; DAVID LYNCH Body   Routine post-Brexit checks on goods shipped from Great Britain to final destinations in Northern Ireland are to be removed as part of a government deal to restore power-sharing at Stormont. A command paper titled Safeguarding The Union commits to replacing the current green lane process, which requires percentages of goods to be checked as they arrive from Great Britain, with a "UK internal market system" that will govern the movement of goods that will remain within the United Kingdom. DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson has hailed the move as a key concession that will effectively scrap the contentious so-called Irish Sea border for goods destined to remain within the UK. "There should not be a border within the UK internal market. These proposals remove that border," he said. The measure is part of a wide-ranging deal agreed between the DUP and the government that is set to bring about the restoration of devolved government in Northern Ireland after a two-year hiatus. Prime Minister Rishi Sunak said restored powersharing in Northern Ireland offered the prospect of a "brighter future". Mr Sunak told the Commons: "After two years without an executive, there is now a prospect of powersharing back up and running, strengthening our Union, giving people the local, accountable government that they need, and offering a brighter future for Northern Ireland." The DUP has agreed to drop its two-year blockade of Stormont in exchange for the government measures aimed at addressing its concerns about post-Brexit trading arrangements that created economic barriers between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK. The Stormont Assembly could sit again as soon as Saturday. While Sir Jeffrey Donaldson has secured the backing of party colleagues to accept the deal, there are those within the DUP who remain deeply sceptical of the proposed agreement to restore power-sharing. Speaking in the Commons, East Antrim MP Sammy Wilson voiced his concerns as he heavily criticised the government. "When the Northern Ireland Assembly sits, ministers and Assembly members will be expected by law to adhere to and implement laws which are made in Brussels, which they had no say over and no ability to amend, and no ability to stop," he said. "This is a result of this spineless, weak-kneed, Brexit-betraying government, refusing to take on the EU and its interference in Northern Ireland." Under the deal, the post-Brexit red lane for transporting goods from GB to NI and on into the EU Single Market will remain, but the command paper offers measures aimed at reducing the volume of trade required to use that red-tape heavy route, with a prediction that 80% of goods will now move free of routine checks through the internal market system. The move to reduce post-Brexit checks on GB-NI trade would represent a change to the current EU/UK Windsor Framework agreement and therefore would require Brussels approval. It is understood the EU has been kept up to date with the shape of the government's package of measures. Downing Street has said that the deal contains "significant" changes to the Windsor Framework's "operation", but is not about altering the "fundamentals" of the framework. The formal implementation of any changes to the framework are expected to be examined and decided upon within the existing EU/UK joint committee framework in the days and weeks ahead. Graphic    BORDER FEARS: DUP leader Sir Jeffrey Donaldson leaving his party's HQ at Dundela in east Belfast after briefing senior members on the proposals. Load-Date: February 1, 2024  End of Document
