   Seven years on, one in five British voters say Brexit went well Irish Independent June 24, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 29 Length: 627 words Byline: JOHN DOWNING Body   I T'S hard to say "I told you so" with much grace - and it's often rather pointless to even try. The infamous EU-UK divorce gave us that ugly word "Brexit" - the consequences of which have now given us a sad, if slightly less ugly word, "Bregrets", as many British citizens feel things have not worked out as hoped. In the growing Brexit lexicon, you can also add "Brecriminations" and a host of other neologisms to describe the old phenomenon known as "buyers' remorse". But, as some Irish politicians liked to say after the banking system and national economy collapsed in 2008, "we are where we are". Seven years ago, we were all poring over the political and economic fallout of a momentous decision on June 23, 2016 by voters in our nearest neighbour and major trading partner, which has an important engagement with the northern part of this island. That fallout is far from settled, with many details of resultant border controls still to pan out. This week, a study for the think-tank UK in a Changing Europe laid bare a notable picture of national regret seven years after Britain voted 52pc to 48pc to leave the European Union. The study, by pollsters Public First, reveals just one in five Leave voters - 18pc - believes Brexit has "gone well" or "very well". Only 30pc say it has "neither turned out well or badly" and 26pc believe it is "too soon to say". The separatist sentiment does remain strong but remarkably diminished, with 29pc saying they support the UK's continued EU exile. Of those who were Leave voters, but now believe it is going badly, 69pc lay the blame on ministers, saying "UK politicians were ineffective and failed to get a good deal". That reflects some realpolitik finally creeping into public sentiment, although it is more accurate to sum things up by saying the UK governments led by the luckless Theresa May and the calamitous Boris Johnson consistently played a poor hand very badly. Half of that recriminating Leave grouping said Britain's leaders and officials gave in too much to EU demands during marathon withdrawal negotiations. The "blame Europe view" also persists here, with 42pc accusing the EU of "being hostile towards us" in those crunch talks. The UK in a Changing Europe organisation has consistently produced some challenging and truthful Brexit assessments for years now. Its director, Anand Menon, had some interesting things to say about this survey. "While very few people think Brexit is going well, a large number of Leavers also believe it is still too soon to make a definitive judgment. Many Leave voters believe Brexit has not been a success because politicians have let them down," Mr Menon said. He added that the long-term danger may be a further erosion of faith in democracy, and the statistics bear out this view - 78pc of Brexiteers and 79pc of Remainers said they had "lost faith in UK politicians in recent years". One short summation of the Brexit decision was a loss of faith on the part of British voters in politicians and senior officials, or a rejection of "experts". But don't expect Brexit II any time soon. A second referendum is backed by just 44pc, with 33pc against. Two-thirds of Leavers are opposed to a re-run. Still, a longer-term EU-UK reconciliation cannot be totally ruled out. Among all voters, 48pc favour going back into the EU, while 32pc would stay out. Among those Brexiteers who think it is going badly, 40pc would vote to rejoin the EU while 30pc still want to stay outside. Public First quizzed 2,005 voters online between May 26 and June 2. Overall, seven years after a bitter campaign and a close result, Brexit remains a very raw topic. Any return of the UK into the EU fold would be a slow and incremental process that few in British politics right now appear ready to broach. Load-Date: June 24, 2023  End of Document
