   Shoppers face whopping hikes on EU delicacies i-news January 20, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 1553 words Byline: Cahal Milmo Body   Dozens of Continental delicacies from Spanish hams to Italian cheeses imported to Britain are set to face price rises and delays as a result of new post-Brexit border controls being introduced in the next fortnight, experts have warned. More than 20 categories of foodstuffs originating from the European Union - ranging from salamis and sausages to oysters and eggs - will be subject to stringent new health documentation requirements from 31 January. The measures have been delayed five times since Brexit by ministers due to inflation fears. Trade organisations have told i there is a serious danger that companies on both sides of the Channel are ill-prepared for the new rules being imposed on a swathe of so-called "medium-risk" foods and plants entering Britain from the EU, worth an annual total of as much as £18bn. UK-based importers and their Continental suppliers are set to have to foot an additional bill of £160m to provide a document known as an export health certificate (EHC) for every consignment reaching these shores - a procedure which multiple sources said is almost certain to result in increased prices for British consumers. An owner of a delicatessen company based in southern England, which imports goods worth £50,000 a week from the EU, told i: "I have lost track of the conversations I've had with suppliers who simply don't know about the EHC requirements or are expecting us to deal with the red tape. That could quite easily add a few thousand to our costs and we can't absorb that; it will be passed on to customers. All the nice things we like to get from Europe - soft cheeses, beautiful hams, pâtés - are probably going to cost more. It's undoubtedly a price of Brexit." Trade groups and food businesses said the increased costs are likely to fall disproportionately on artisanal small and medium-sized sellers and have already led to some European suppliers deciding to halt deliveries to Britain because the burden of the new paperwork is too costly. In extreme cases, customs officers could order consignments to be turned back at the UK border if exporters fail to provide the right paperwork once targeted physical checks begin at the end of April. An analysis of the new rules shows they will apply to 31 different categories of foodstuffs and plants such as dairy or shrubs, with 52 separate classes of product - such as soft cheeses or crustaceans - now requiring certification. According to one survey, 91 per cent of British businesses are unaware of, or know very little about, the new rules. Jose Sol, who set up his Wiltshirebased specialist business importing high-quality Spanish ham (inset) to Britain last year, after two decades in the charcuterie industry, told i he has had to employ an external agency to deal with the "nightmarish" documentation requirements. The jamon expert, who supplies Michelin-starred restaurants as well as events including Royal Ascot and the Baftas, said his administration costs per delivery have doubled to about £180 alongside increased delivery times, and that several of his suppliers - family-owned businesses in Spain - have said they will have stop delivering to the UK. He said: "I am a very small company dealing in small quantities of a highquality product. But the cost of this documentation is the same regardless of your size, so it falls very heavily on a business like mine." The supply chain concerns are accompanied by criticism that the Government has not done enough to prepare British and Continental stakeholders for the new EHC regulations, which require designated officials or vets in EU countries to certify that goods for export comply with UK health and hygiene standards. It is understood by i that the authorities in Italy warned last month that they face a race against time to obtain a final version of health certificate paperwork and provide a translation for regional officials in time to meet the 31 January deadline. Kate Shirley-Quirk, director of Delicioso UK, an Oxfordshire importer specialising in Spanish foods, said that the only communications her company had received was two emails in the past fortnight from import authorities in Ashford, Kent, offering links to a data sheet of risk categories for foodstuffs . She told i: "As we carry around 450 lines, almost all with different commodity codes, checking each one to find out its risk category in advance is more than we have time to do." She added that the company's export agents in Spain appeared to have had more assistance from the Spanish authorities than her own company had received from those in the UK and it is already clear that there will be an impact on "end price". "It will definitely cost more, including the port checks in due course, and it is already creating more delays and costs in getting orders ready, as each supplier has to communicate with the customs agent in detail about what is required. We have also had one supplier say they are no longer able to supply us. There may be others in due course." For its part, the Spanish Ministry of Agriculture insisted that food businesses in the country were "well prepared" for the new UK border rules, adding that it expects exporting companies to meet the requirements "without any special difficulty". The Institute of Export and International Trade, which represents UK importers and exporters, said there is concern that many Continental suppliers could end up placing the onus for dealing with the post-Brexit import system on their UK customers. The body's director general, Marco Forgione, said: "Having spoken to Micro, small and medium enterprises and trade representative organisations in the EU, they don't really understand what is happening with the new requirements. And our members are concerned." The British Chambers of Commerce (BCC), which represents 50,000 UK companies, said firms remained in the dark about the new rules despite their implementation being postponed five times since the UK formally left the EU in January 2020. William Bain, the BCC's head of trade policy, said: "There's clearly a communication challenge. Inbound checks have been postponed on five occasions - and we've continually urged both the UK Government and the EU to do more proactive communication with business." According to the Government's own figures, the cost of implementing the new border controls will be £330m, with £160m of that figure coming from the health certification procedure for imports . One insider said: "That cost will have to be met from somewhere." It is understood that concerns within the food industry are particularly focused on 31 April, when Britain plans to start targeted physical and online inspections of food consignments . Both the BCC and the Food and Drink Federation told i that they do not anticipate goods being rejected for incorrect documentation next month and expect "light touch" enforcement thereafter - although there are concerns within the sector that the scale of fees for these inspections has yet to be outlined by the Government. The Spanish Ministry of Agriculture insisted that food businesses in the country were "well prepared" for the new UK border rules, adding that it expects exporting companies to meet the requirements "without any special difficulty, generally speaking". The Department for Business and Trade has not responded to requests for comment. Blocked Produce subject to new border controls Foods Dairy products including milk, soft and hard cheeses and cream. Processed meat products including ham, bacon, sausages, salamis and cured meats. Eggs and frozen or chilled processed egg product - s. Fishery products such as shellfish, oysters, crabs and lobsters. Minced meat, poultry, rabbit and game, and animal fats. Untreated animal hides and dog chews. Plants Fruit-bearing trees such as cherry, plum, peach and apricot, and rootstocks or dormant buds used for grafting or propagation. Species within the rubus genus such as blackberries, raspberries and other bramble fruits. Case study 'Smaller family businesses can't cope' For Jose Sol, the regular consignments that bring highquality air-cured ham from his native Spain to his Wiltshirebased business are both his passion and his livelihood. The fact that new post-Brexit health checks will double the administrative cost to him of importing his "jamon" and inflict significant delays on his shipments is thus a source of frustration . "It is a nightmare," said the 51-year-old. "Brexit may be good news for the UK in some respects but in terms of trade with Europe it feels like a big mistake. If you are a very small company bringing in a high-quality product, this is a large burden. It increases the costs a lot." Mr Sol, who has lived in Britain for more than a decade and imports about 2,000 hams a year, said he also expects his delivery times to double to about 20 days. At the same time, he has lost suppliers in Spain - . "I have always sought and supported suppliers with the best product and they are often smaller family businesses," he explained. "But some of them have told me they cannot sustain these new rules and I am going to lose them. I am concerned that I will lose more. "I suppose the new system will eventually normalise but for now it is a real struggle." We carry 450 lines. Checking a risk category for each one is more than we have time to do Load-Date: January 20, 2024  End of Document
