   Silence on Brexit harms is destructive i-news July 29, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 25 Length: 365 words Byline: Yasmin Alibhai- Brown Body   The Covid naysayers still claim the pandemic never really happened. Nothing can move their congealed "truths". It's the same with Brexiteers who cling to their anti-EU beliefs and are impervious to evidence. As the project crumbles, it becomes harder to speak up. The New York Times columnist Michelle Goldberg finds this baffling: "I've been struck, visiting the UK, by the curious political taboo against discussing how badly Brexit has gone, even among many who voted against it... Britain's divorce from the EU and Trump's reign in the US turned out catastrophically... But while America can't stop talking about Trump, many in the UK can scarcely stand to think about Brexit." MPs, ministers and many commentators are gagging themselves. It's self-censorship on a scale I've never witnessed before. This surely can't go on. Brexit has led to inflation and supply chain problems. Goldberg says travel between Europe and the UK is "a punishing ordeal". Our academies are in crisis: research funding for collaborations with EU universities is not available; EU student numbers are decreasing fast. Nigel Farage, Brexit's prophet, now says "Brexit has failed" - and blames others for the failure. The ardent Leaver, Lord Hannan, admits, without blushing, that Britain is now a poor country. Polls from YouGov, Ipsos and NatCen Social Research find the majority now regret leaving the EU. One survey found a margin of 60-40 per cent. But like shameful family secrets, Britain suppresses these realities. The Tory MP Tobias Ellwood told Goldberg that Brexit was like a "wound" people want to avoid picking at. The London Mayor, Sadiq Khan, is frustrated by the omerta, the elephant in the room. They are among a small number of honest political brokers. Rishi Sunak, always a Brexiteer, now uses the emotional power of populism to retain power. Keir Starmer won't go there because "Red Wall" voters - the only ones who matter to him - voted out. Ellwood thinks that the election will bring release and hope: "I can see all parties embracing the idea of rejoining the single market." After so many years of Brexit thought compliance, will this country be able to take such big steps? I don't think so. Load-Date: July 29, 2023  End of Document
