   Simon Kuper: "Brexit was gestated with lies and fantasies". CE Noticias Financieras English November 22, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 635 words Body   When Charles Ryder rented a first floor room at his Oxford college, he was already warned that he was making a mistake. One night Sebastian Flyte leaned out of the window and vomited in Ryder's quarters. That vomit was the beginning of a great friendship between the two men and was also the start of one of the most celebrated novels of British literature, Return to Brideshead (Evelyn Waugh, 1945). Charles and Sebastian's university life was spent between glasses of champagne, trips to the countryside and exclusive parties. But when Simon Kuper (Kampala, Uganda, 1969) entered Oxford from the Netherlands in 1988, he realized that things hadn't changed that much, or that perhaps students in the 1980s wanted to be like Ryder and Flyte. "In the Oxford of the 1980s, the cult of work was frowned upon," the journalist says. "In the Oxford of the 1980s, the cult of work was frowned upon," says Kuper in Amigocracia (Capitán Swing, translated by Carolina Santano Fernández), a book in which the author - who now lives in Paris and writes for the Financial Times - recalls his time at the famous university, which was dominated by an upper-class caste that, over the years, came to power in the United Kingdom. Margaret Thatcher, Tony Blair, David Cameron, Theresa May, Boris Johnson and Liz Truss studied at Oxford, which is "a factory of prime ministers," as Kuper explains in an interview with La Vanguardia. The well-known university was also the factory where Brexit was conceived. Kuper is very clear that this process materialized due to two circumstances: the type of students and the education provided at Oxford. "It was a place for upper-class white men from elite schools like Eton. In those days there were already women, some foreigners and children of workers, but they were the fewest and often suffered the mockery and humiliation of the caste of which Cameron or Johnson were part," recalls the writer and journalist. Today it may seem strange, but in the Oxford of the eighties, studying literature was much more prestigious than studying science, because the caste "thought that it would be the lower classes who would work, they focused on learning to talk, talk and talk..." The art of dialectics was honed in debating societies like the Union or the Ouca, both of which were conservative in nature, where "it was much more important how things were said than the things that were said." Since working was frowned upon, tutors only required students to write "papers on, for example, the Second World War, for which it was enough to read two or three pages of a textbook, the important thing was to know how to argue, because it was considered an exercise for life, the content remained in the background". In those humanities classes they talked about the times when England was a great empire and that "contributed to create a rejection of the continent and Brussels and its bureaucrats and caused students like Jacob Rees-Mogg to start thinking about the exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union. Only Johnson, whose grandmother was French and who speaks a little Italian, had sympathy for Europe." The seed was already planted and took root many years later in 2016 coinciding with an economic crisis. "The Brexit campaign was launched with Oxford techniques, a well-structured discourse in which the content did not matter. The Brexit was gestated with lies and fantasies. It was promised that it would limit immigration and make the UK richer, but it wasn't true." Seven years later the British have woken up from that dream that has turned into a nightmare: "The Brexit was a mistake. People know that and if there was a referendum, they would vote to return to Europe. You can't talk about disaster, but the UK outside Europe is weaker." That's something you didn't learn at Oxford. Load-Date: November 23, 2023  End of Document
