   Six years after failing Brexit, David Cameron returns to top-level politics CE Noticias Financieras English November 14, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1181 words Body   At the age of 57 and after having served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom between 2010 and 2016, David Cameron returned to the front line of British politics. No longer as leader of the Conservative Party, but as the new chancellor to replace James Cleverly, who moved to the Interior, after the dismissal of the controversial Suella Braverman. Cameron's landing, which took the most experienced political analysts of the country by surprise, comes at a time when the government of Prime Minister Rishi Sunak is going through internal divisions and is experiencing a severe popularity crisis that could lead him to lose the legislative elections scheduled for next year. "While I have been out of frontline politics for the past seven years, I hope that my experience as Conservative leader for 11 years and prime minister for six will enable me to help the prime minister deal with daunting international challenges, including the war in Ukraine and the crisis in the Middle East," Cameroon said. British media have highlighted the rarity of someone who is not a lawmaker holding a senior government position, and that it was decades since a former prime minister held a cabinet post. In fact, the government reported that Cameron will be appointed to the House of Lords, the unelected upper house of Parliament, in order to join the cabinet. The last Foreign Secretary to serve in the Lords, rather than in the House of Commons, which is elected by popular vote, was Peter Carrington, who was part of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's government in the 1980s. Cameron's appointment brings back to the front line of government a leader who had to leave power because of Britain's decision to leave the European Union (EU), since it was Cameron himself who in 2016 called the referendum on the UK's membership of the bloc confident that the country would vote to remain, but the opposite result forced him to resign the day after the consultation. According to British analysts, Sunak's decision to incorporate him into the government could generate new fissures in the Conservative Party and harsh criticism from the right wing of the political space, a staunch defender of the separation from the EU, a position that the now Prime Minister also defended during the 2016 plebiscite. For the time being, everyone agrees that Sunak's audacious coup de rudder is an attempt to reestablish his shaky government. The Conservatives have been in power for 13 years, but opinion polls over the past few months have put the Conservative Party 15 to 20 points behind Labour, amid a stagnant economy, persistently high inflation, an overburdened healthcare system and a wave of public sector strikes. Cameron became leader of the Conservative Party in 2005 and five years later arrived in Downing Street as the UK's youngest prime minister in nearly 200 years, at 43. His six-year term, first in coalition with the Liberal Democrats and then with a majority government, was dominated by his desire to reduce the deficit and the introduction of austerity measures. But when he pledged in his 2015 election manifesto to hold a referendum on the UK remaining in the EU, the focus shifted. Cameron backed the option to remain in the bloc. During his government he imposed years of harsh cuts in public spending after the 2008 global financial crisis, which wore down the country's welfare system and state-funded health service. After leaving office, he became embroiled in a scandal over his lobbying on behalf of Greensill Capital, a financial services firm that later collapsed. The return of Cameron, a member of the most moderate wing of the Conservative Party, has its origin in the withering dismissal as Home Secretary of Braverman, representative of the most conservative sector and victim of the umpteenth of his controversies, when he criticized the London police before last Saturday's pro-Palestinian demonstration. According to some analysts, Sunak's authority had been badly hit after the declarations of the now former minister and there is no little speculation that Braverman was looking for an exit from the cabinet to position herself as Sunak's internal rival and future candidate to lead the party in case the government loses the general elections in a year's time. The reading adds that with Braverman's exit, Sunak is seeking to re-establish his authority and appeal to moderate sectors that have left the party, a reading that reinforces the fact that Cameron has moderate positions as well as extensive political experience. Under fire from opposition lawmakers and members of the ruling Conservative Party to oust Braverman, Sunak appears to have finalized a long-planned reshuffle to bring in allies and remove ministers he felt were not performing their duties properly. If so, the process was accelerated when the ever-controversial Braverman challenged him last week in an unauthorized article accusing police of "double standards" at protests, suggesting they were tough on right-wing protesters but soft on pro-Palestinian demonstrators, stoking tensions between a pro-Palestinian demonstration and a far-right counter-protest that left nearly 150 people arrested. While Braverman's dismissal was not a surprise, Cameron's appointment was, to the point that it caused shockwaves in the Conservative Party, a decision welcomed by more centrist lawmakers but detested by some on the right who described it as the "ultimate surrender of Brexit." Cameron said he was happy to take on his new role because at a time of global change, "it has rarely been more important for this country to support our allies, strengthen our partnerships and make sure our voice is heard." "While I may have disagreed with some individual decisions, it is clear to me that Rishi Sunak is a strong and capable prime minister, who is showing exemplary leadership at a difficult time," Cameron wrote on social networking site X. Educated at the prestigious elite Eton College, near Windsor Palace, and Oxford University, Cameron will face two difficult issues as the new foreign minister, such as the war in Ukraine and the conflict between Hamas and Israel. In his memoirs in 2019, he launched a fierce attack on his former rival and then prime minister, Boris Johnson, accusing him of supporting Brexit only to boost his own career. While Brexit was her biggest political setback, on a personal level she experienced a family tragedy. The eldest of his four children, Ivan, was born with Ohtahara syndrome, a rare combination of cerebral palsy and severe epilepsy, which led to his death in 2009, at the age of six. That referendum defeat came after a series of successes for Cameron, who managed to guide his party to victory in the 2015 election, winning an absolute majority. He also won another referendum, the Scottish independence referendum in 2014, a successful spiral that was halted by the referendum that led to Brexit. Before that defeat, he had announced that he would not run in the 2020 elections, wanting to devote more time to his wife and three children. (With information from agencies)  Load-Date: November 15, 2023  End of Document
