   SNP to demand parliamentary inquiry into impact of Brexit on cost of living The National (Scotland) June 14, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 NewsQuest Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Length: 403 words Byline: Adam Robertson Body   THE SNP will demand a parliamentary inquiry into the impact of Brexit on the soaring cost of living in the UK. Ahead of the opposition day debate on the SNP motion, which would create a new parliamentary select committee focused on the impact of Brexit, MP Dr Philippa Whitford said, -independence is Scotland-s only route back to the EU-. The committee would be made up of 45 members and be chaired by an SNP MP. This is an innovative use of an opposition day, not seen this before. https://t.co/cTXk1KG9dZ - PARLY (@PARLYapp) June 14, 2023 She warned that -people are paying an unacceptable price for Westminster failure, as the Tories and pro-Brexit Labour Party wreck the economy-. The SNP will push for a vote on the motion and have urged the Labour Party to -stop dancing to the Tory tune on Brexit-. READ MORE: SNP police investigation costs outweigh 'missing' 600,000 It comes as analysis from the London School of Economics revealed Brexit has added 6 billion to UK food bills, leaving households 210 worse off on average. Meanwhile, the OBR has forecast a 4% hit to UK GDP and a 15% hit to UK trade from Brexit. Whitford continued: -Brexit has been an unmitigated disaster for the UK economy - costing us billions and sending the cost of living soaring. -Yet, the Tories and pro-Brexit Labour Party are guilty of a conspiracy of silence over its devastating impact. -The SNP is the only party offering real change with independence, which is Scotland-s only route back to Europe, sustained economic growth and prosperity.- She called on both the Tories and Labour to -admit the long-term damage their Brexit obsession is doing to Scotland-. The call for the inquiry comes as the latest figures show that UK GDP increased by 0.2% in April, according to the Office for National Statistics. Commenting, the SNP-s economy spokesperson Stewart Hosie said: -The UK-s sluggish, post-Brexit growth continues to hold Scotland back. -At a time when millions of households are suffering from the Westminster cost of living crisis, neither the Tories or pro-Brexit Labour offer families an alternative. READ MORE: New paper shows impact of UK Government imposing authority on Holyrood -It makes sense to re-join the EU and regain access to the world-s largest single market, that-s seven times bigger than the UK market, to grow Scotland-s economy and drive down household bills. -The SNP is the only party offering that future to voters.- Load-Date: June 14, 2023  End of Document
