   SNP's Flynn to campaign in Rutherglen and will push Brexit to centre stage The Herald (Glasgow) August 9, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Newsquest Media Group All Rights Reserved  Section: Pg. 4 Length: 354 words Byline: Alan Simpson  Body   SNP Westminster leader Stephen Flynn will be campaigning today in the Rutherglen and Hamilton West ahead of a by-election in the constituency expected in the autumn. Mr Flynn will be in Cambuslang alongside the SNP's candidate Katy Loudon. A date has not yet been set for the by-election, but?is likely to take place in October, and?is being fought by Labour and the SNP. The poll was triggered by a successful recall petition last week for Margaret Ferrier, who was suspended from the House of Commons for breaching coronavirus rules in 2020. Ms Ferrier, who has sat as an independent since having the SNP whip removed, has confirmed she will not be running again in the seat near Glasgow. Ahead of the visit, Mr Flynn hit out at Labour's stance on Brexit, which the SNP?continue to oppose. The SNP have made Labour's acceptance of EU withdrawal a key part of its by-election campaign strategy as it seeks to hold the seat, tipped to switch to Labour. The SNP wants a second independence referendum and would plan to join the EU if Scotland becomes independent. Labour opposed Brexit ahead of the referendum in 2016 but has now accepted the UK's departure from the EU and from the European single market. "Brexit is fuelling the UK cost of living crisis and making families in Rutherglen and Hamilton West poorer - and the SNP is the only party offering an escape from Brexit with independence," said Mr Flynn. "Sir Keir Starmer's pro-Brexit Labour Party has sold Scotland out by backing a hard Tory Brexit - and ruling out any return to the EU and single market". Ms Loudon said: "Brexit has been a disaster for Rutherglen and Hamilton West. The SNP is the only party offering real help with the cost of living - and a route back to the EU with independence." It is being seen as a straight fight between Mr Shanks, a teacher who lives locally and who runs a scout group for disabled children, and Ms Loudon, who is a South Lanarkshire councillor. Asked about Labour's current support for Brexit last week, Mr Shanks said he had voted remain and believed a Labour Government would deliver Brexit in a better way than the Conservatives. Load-Date: August 9, 2023  End of Document
