   Spanish investment in the UK grows by 22%, despite Brexit and the constant dancing in Downing Street CE Noticias Financieras English December 13, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 931 words Body    Neither the Brexit nor the political instability in Westminster (in two months up to three different tenants passed through Downing Street and there may be yet another change of Tory leader before the general elections) have made the United Kingdom lose its attractiveness where the growth of Spanish investment has reached 73.8 billion euros, an increase of 22% since 2020, maintaining its position as the second most important international destination for Spaniards. The United States continues to maintain leadership (concentrating 15.1% of total investment), but the gap has in any case narrowed, since in 2021 -the last year for which official data is available- more has been invested in the land of Shakespeare where half of the Spanish companies plan to increase their presence, investments and workforce in 2024.  These are the main conclusions drawn from the Barometer of Spanish investment in the United Kingdom carried out by the Spanish Chamber of Commerce in the United Kingdom, whose fifth edition was presented this Wednesday at the Spanish Embassy in London at an event attended by business leaders and representatives of the governments of both countries. Among the attendees were the British Kevin Hollinrake, Undersecretary of State for Business and Trade, and his Spanish counterpart Xiana Méndez. This is the only event that brings the two administrations together annually, as there is no bilateral summit as such between the two countries.  "Spain's investment appetite for the British market declined in 2018 and 2019, when Brexit-related uncertainty was at its peak. Fortunately, that investment has not only recovered, it has increased. The UK market remains very attractive. Even more attractive than the euro zone markets, which is striking," stresses Eduardo Barrachina, president of the Chamber of Commerce.  "The investment climate is positive. Spanish companies have not looked for alternative markets. When a company thinks of projecting itself internationally, it is very likely to think of the United Kingdom as its first destination," he adds. However, there is always room for improvement. "There are large infrastructure projects that have come to a standstill, creating uncertainty for construction companies, and then there is the issue of mobility," Barrachina explains, referring to the new restrictions imposed by the new immigration plan.  The barometer is based on a survey of more than one hundred companies for whominflation has undoubtedly remained the main focus of attention in 2023. Central banks have continued to tighten monetary policy in their attempt to control price increases in a context in which economic activity and the labor market remain resilient.  Since the beginning of 2022, wage growth in the United Kingdom has been close to 8% year-on-year, a figure of concern to the Bank of England, which is targeting inflation at 2%. Since the beginning of 2023, the British institution has increased interest rates by 175 basis points, bringing the reference rate to 5.25%. Since mid-2022, it has accumulated more than 500 basis points of increases, making it one of the most intense and rapid interest rate hikes in its history. It is only surpassed by the monetary policy tightening cycles of 1977-79 and 1984-85. Spanish investment in the United Kingdom is centered on the services sector, where it is highly diversified. Despite the attractiveness of some industrial sectors, the telecommunications and financial sectors lead the investments, with the manufacturing of other non-metallic minerals sector gaining great strength in 2022.  The largest growth in investment stock was observed in the Wholesale trade of electrical and telecommunications equipment, a fact that is explained by the merger of the Spanish company Telefónica and with Liberty's subsidiaries in the United Kingdom. During the first half of 2023, the Energy sector is the only one to have experienced an increase in flows received compared to 2022.  After the Brexit referendum, Spanish investment was resilient in the first years, but in 2018 and 2019 flows to the UK decreased, reaching levels close to those of 2012. However, despite the crisis by Covid in 2020 and 2021 they presented a favorable evolution, which continued in 2022, reaching levels not seen since 2017.  However, the negative perception of Spanish companies about the impact generated by the European divorce is still shared by 54% of respondents, who highlight the lack of labor resulting from the new migration policies implemented by the Conservative government.  With a lead of more than twenty points for the Labour opposition, all indications are that the general election scheduled for 2024 will put an end to the Tory era after more than thirteen years in power. Labour's Keir Starmer, already seen as a future Prime Minister, is a moderate politician who has nothing to do with the radical Jeremy Corbyn, seen in his day as the British Pablo Iglesias. Starmer has already made it clear that his intention is to strengthen ties with the EU. However, he completely rules out a return to the single market or the customs union.  Neither the Brexit nor the political instability in Westminster (in two months up to three different tenants have passed through Downing Street and there may be yet another change of Tory leader before the general elections) have lost the attractiveness of the United Kingdom where the growth of Spanish investment has reached 73.8 billion euros, an increase of 22% since 2020, remaining the second most important international destination for Spaniards.  Load-Date: December 14, 2023  End of Document
