   Starmer 'cannot fix Brexit deal outside the single market' i-news September 19, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 464 words Byline: Hugo Gye ; Leo Cendrowicz Body   EU diplomats and party insiders have warned Sir Keir Starmer that he will be unable to renegotiate the current trade agreement while staying outside the single market and customs union. Labour will claim that fixing the UK's Brexit deal will help control the cost of living crisis to avoid claims it wants to lead Britain back into the EU. But some Labour activists are keen to push the leader towards a more anti-Brexit stance - even while the Conservatives are ready to pounce on any evidence that the party is abandoning Leave voters. Sir Keir told the Financial Times that he wanted to fix Britain's relationship with the EU for the sake of his children. He said: "We have to make it work. That's not a question of going back in. But I refuse to accept that we can't make it work. I think about those future generations when I say that." Senior figures including the shadow Chancellor, Rachel Reeves, have privately argued that the party should present its Brexit policy as a way of easing inflation by cutting the cost of imports, including by striking a veterinary deal which will remove most health checks on foodstuffs imported to Britain from the continent. The Labour leader said he would seek a "closer trading relationship" with Brussels, pointing to a review of the Trade and Co-operation Agreement - the Brexit deal struck by Boris Johnson - as a key moment to enhance relations. The review is schduled to take place in 2025. But EU insiders and independent experts cast doubt on the idea that this review, which some in Brussels already want to push back to 2026, will be a major moment in reassessing the post-Brexit relationship. One EU source said yesterday: "It is not a renegotiation, there is no mandate to the commission from the member states." The source added that "tweaks" to the existing deal, similar to those agreed by Rishi Sunak under the Windsor Framework on Northern Ireland, could be presented as a breakthrough by Sir Keir for domestic consumption. Potential areas of agreement include rejoining the Erasmus universities scheme and signing a deal on long-term security co-operation. Some senior Labour figures have warned against assuming that a government led by Sir Keir after the next election would automatically be able to secure more friendly terms from the European Union. One shadow minister said: "You can't just walk into Brussels on day one and say 'We demand better terms'. Because they're not sitting there sobbing about how much they miss us. You have to build trust and that will take time. The problem is that relations right now are totally f***ed up." Some activists are likely to push Labour to take a more pro-EU policy, without reopening the debate over Brexit. One source said: "There is no room for ambiguity here, we're all Brexiteers now." Load-Date: September 18, 2023  End of Document
