   Starmer 'still getting it all wrong on Brexit'; EXCLUSIVE The Express September 26, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 17 Length: 390 words Byline: Giles Sheldrick Body   LABOUR will betray Brexit and ignore the democratic will of 17.4 million people, an senior Tory claimed. Former Levelling Up Minister Sir Simon Clarke said Opposition leader Sir Keir Starmer was missing the point about splitting from the EU. He said: "Sir Keir said 'most of the conflict with the UK being outside the EU arises in so far as the UK wants to diverge and do different things to the rest of our EU partners'. "It was a classic - but shocking - insight into the lack of ambition Labour holds for Britain after Brexit and a reminder of everything at stake in next year's General Election. "Sir Keir is wrong because the whole point of Brexit is for the UK to be able to do things differently. "We don't want to be a rule-taker, blindly shadowing the EU in all its decisions." The row comes after hardcore Remainers mainers gathered in London for the national rejoin march at the weekend. Among them was the European Parliament's Brexit coordinator and former Belgian PM Guy Verhofstadt who labelled leave voters "extremists". He wants a renewal of UK membership, telling Brexit opponents the bloc is "waiting for you". Sir Keir, who has been on a charm offensive with European leaders, said a Labour government "would not diverge from the EU" - widely interpreted as the first move to full-scale realignment. Shadow foreign secretary David Lammy has proposed regular meetings between UK and EU ministers as part of a major reset of relations under a Labour government. It is claimed the party would strike a pact with Brussels in an EU scheme for burden-sharing on migration. The Tories said this would result in Britain being forced to take more than 100,000 illegal migrants every year. Sir Simon, 38, who was also former Chief Secretary to the Treasury, said Britain was right to leave the EU and the benefits are crystal clear. He said: "From agri-tech to AI, more chances abound if we are prepared to be innovative, and not settle for working in lockstep with the slowest-moving EU member state. "But for this to happen, we need leadership that's confident about our country's strengths and that embraces, rather than shies away from, our newfound independence. "It's up to the Conservatives to deliver on the mandate we have been given to deliver change - and to prove whether you voted Leave or Remain, Brexit Britain's future is bright." Graphic    'Shocking insight'... Sir Simon Clarke Load-Date: September 26, 2023  End of Document
