   Starmer denies plan to reverse Brexit or join customs union The Times (London) September 23, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 483 words Byline: Oliver Wright Body   Labour does not want to undo Brexit, Sir Keir Starmer has insisted, after the Tories seized on comments he made suggesting that he would not diverge from EU laws or do "different things" from Brussels if he came to power. In an attempt to shut down the row Starmer said that there was "no case for rejoining the EU, no case for the customs union or single market" and all UK laws would be "made in this country for the public interest". But he added: "That does not mean that a Labour government would lower standards on food or lower the rights that people have at work. "That's been consistent Labour Party policy for years. Incidentally, that's also government policy." Starmer was recorded in Canada saying that Labour wanted to foster close ties with the bloc. "Most of the conflict with the UK being outside of the [EU] arises insofar as the UK wants to diverge and do different things to the rest of our EU partners," he said at an event last Saturday alongside Jonas Gahr Store, the Norwegian prime minister. "Obviously, the more we share values, the more we share a future together, the less the conflict, and actually, different ways of solving problems become available. He added: "Actually we don't want to diverge, we don't want to lower standards, we don't want to rip up environmental standards, working standards for people that work, food standards and all the rest of it." The remarks were seized on by senior government ministers. Jeremy Hunt, the chancellor, claimed the comments would "worry a lot of people that what he really wants to do is to unpick Brexit". He told LBC "We want to be good friends with our neighbours across the Channel, but I think any suggestion that you want to align our laws and regulations with the EU will worry a lot of the people who voted for Brexit." Mark Spencer, the environment minister, accused the Labour leader of "flipflopping" in his approach to Brussels. "To keep obsessing, as the Labour Party do, over Brexit and looking back with pink-tinted spectacles and talking about following their rules, I think just takes us back in time," But Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, told the BBC that Labour's position was clear and that while the party wanted a better relationship with the EU it did not want to relitigate Brexit. "We don't want to rejoin the EU in name or any other way; we accept the result of the referendum," she said. "That was seven years ago, more than seven years ago now. Times have moved on. But we do want to have a better relationship with our nearest neighbours and trading partners." She added: "Even Rishi Sunak has accepted that is possible, by re-entering the Horizon research programme. But there are other areas, for example making it easier to trade agricultural goods or helping our services sector with a mutual recognition of professional qualifications, helping our fantastic cultural industries tour round Europe." Graphic    Sir Keir Starmer spoke of a shared future with the EU Load-Date: September 23, 2023  End of Document
