   Starmer will'drag Britain back into EU'; LABOUR PLANS CLOSER TIES WITH BRUSSELS The Express September 19, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 875 words Byline: Sam Lister Body   LABOUR is trying to drag the UK back into the European Union by "stealth" with its plans to rewrite the Brexit deal,Tories claimed last night. Ahead of his arrival in Paris yesterday, Sir Keir Starmer revealed his plans for closer ties with Brussels if he wins power. But academics said it is "far from clear he can deliver on this pledge", while senior Conservatives warned it showed Sir Keir cannot be trusted on Brexit. Lee Anderson, deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, said: "Starmer has all but admitted that Labour's number one priority is dragging the UK back into the EU by stealth. "Sir Keir spent years trying to block Brexit and overturn the largest democratic vote in this country's history - and still can't get over his EU obsession. Only the Conservative government can be trusted to protect Brexit." Former Brexit minister David Jones said Sir Keir wants the UK to be so closely aligned to the EU that it "makes no difference" that we are no longer a member of the bloc. He added: "Rewriting the Brexit deal actually means aligning with EU standards. "The whole purpose of Brexit was to be able to draw up our own standards to make us more competitive. Starmer would kill competition. "If we had done what Starmer had wanted us to do we would never have signed up to the CPTPP [trans pacific trade], which is far more desirable than further aligning with the EU because it is the most dynamic economies in the world as opposed to an economy that is attracting less and less a share of world trade." He added: "It mustn't be forgotten that Starmer wanted a second referendum. What Starmer is up to is aligning the UK, keeping it in the orbit of Brussels, with a view one day of seeking to rejoin. "People should take everything he says about Europe with several large pinches of salt." Immigration minister Robert Jenrick posted on X last night: "As Sir Keir continues his holiday from reality he should add Lampedusa to his itinerary to see the harsh reality of what he wants to impose on communities here in the United Kingdom - against their will. "Sir Keir's grand plan is simply to make illegal migration Trust... Lee Anderson legal." Sir Keir took the train to the French capital with Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves and Shadow Foreign Secretary David Lammy ahead of his bilateral meeting with French president Emmanuel Macron today. Their talks are expected to include discussions about post-Brexit relations. The trade deal signed by Boris Johnson faces its first five-yearly review in 2025. Sir Keir said the agreement is "far too thin" and Labour would "get a much better deal for the UK". But he insisted Labour would not take Britain back into the bloc, or the single market and customs union. He said: "We have to make it work. That's not a question of going back in. But I refuse to accept that we can't make it work. I think about those future generations when I say that." He added: "Almost everyone recognises the deal Johnson struck is not a good deal - it's far too thin. "As we go into 2025 we will attempt to get a much better deal. I do think we can have a closer trading relationship as well. That's subject to further discussion." Anand Menon, director of UK In A Changing Europe, said: "Starmer wants to secure a 'much better' Brexit deal for the UK. But it's far from clear he can deliver on this pledge. For one thing, the kinds of 'improvements' he has in mind - signing an agreement on veterinary standards, for instance - will not make much of a dent in the impact Brexit has had on the UK economy." Prime Minister Rishi Sunak ruled out renegotiating the Trade and Co-operation Agreement brokered with Brussels. Downing Street said the PM is "focused on maximising the opportunities it presents us with". A spokesman said: "We're not looking to relitigate the past or reopen it in any way, shape or form." Brexit and immigration are opening up as clear dividing lines between the parties ahead of the next general election. Last week Labour said it wanted to secure a migrant returns agreement with the EU to establish "management and control of the system" as it accused the Conservatives of having "lost control of our borders". Mr Sunak claimed the plan would see the UK accept 100,000 migrants from the EU every year. This was dismissed as "garbage" by Sir Keir. His meeting with Mr Macron comes as the Labour chief seeks to impose himself as a leader on the world stage. He spent the weekend meeting fellow centre-left figures in Montreal, Canada, including the country's prime minister Justin Trudeau. A spokesman for Sir Keir insisted: "As Prime Minister, Keir will re-establish the UK as a trusted and reliable partner, across Europe d, nd is urn ket, cusn, freemoveendless s and beyond, for British business and working people. This doesn't mean a return to the single market, customs union, freedom of movement, nor endless negotiations and rows. It means improving trade, tackling cross border crime, and smashing the people-smuggling gangs the Tories seem content to run our borders. "If the Tories spent half as much energy on fixing their Brexit deal as they do on conjuring nonsense about our position, they may get somewhere." 'What Starmer is up to is aligning the UK...with a view one day of seeking to rejoin' Graphic    Trust... Lee AndersonC'est bon...Sir Keir arrives in Paris with Rachel Reeves and David LammyPictures: GETTY, REX Load-Date: September 19, 2023  End of Document
