   STEPHEN GLOVER: After Boris, Remainers will redouble their efforts to finagle us back into the eager embrace of Brussels... MailOnline June 14, 2023 Wednesday 9:20 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: DEBATE; Version:1 Length: 1137 words Byline: Stephen Glover for the Daily Mail Body   There is something approaching a consensus in this country that Brexit was an unmitigated disaster. Even many former Brexiteers believe it. If you suggest in a pub or at a dinner party that the jury is still out over Brexit, people will look at you in wonder. How can anyone be so stupid not to recognise that leaving the EU has been a calamity? Once it was only diehard Remainers such as Michael Heseltine and Alastair Campbell who spoke in such absolute terms. Now even Nigel Farage says that 'Brexit has failed'. One recent poll suggested that only 9 per cent of Britons now consider Brexit more of a success than a failure. Some 62 per cent of respondents described it as more of a flop, including many erstwhile Leave voters. It's likely that if a future Labour government were to ease this country back into the EU single market, and even into the European Union itself, it would meet with relatively little resistance. May I dissent? It's not that I believe that Brexit has been a runaway success - one would have to be certifiable to think that. It's just that I struggle to find any evidence that Brexit is the self-inflicted catastrophe many people claim. Remainers assert that Britain has been doing uniquely badly. There was joy in such circles last January, when the International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecast that our economy would shrink by 0.6 per cent this year, and be the weakest performer among advanced G7 nations. Not for the first time, the IMF was up a gumtree. Last week, it emerged that the eurozone (which includes the EU's major economies) slipped into recession in the first three months of this year. That means that it has suffered two quarters of what is rather oddly called 'negative growth'. Yet poor, pathetic Britain has been doing better than the IMF's crystal ball gazers foresaw. The Office for National Statistics announced yesterday that the economy grew 0.2 per cent in April, following growth of 0.1 per cent in the first three months of the year. Not stellar, of course. And some economists think that the higher interest rates which the Bank of England evidently has in store for us may lead to a recession during the second part of the year. We'll see. My point is simply that, notwithstanding dire forecasts by the IMF and indeed the Bank of England, the British economy has been doing slightly better than the eurozone. How is that consonant with the dismal version of events that has been fed to us? Ah, you may say. What about recent years? Haven't we been lagging behind? No. Last year, the UK was the fastest-growing country in the G7, though that was largely a bounce-back from what had been the severest contraction among advanced economies during the pandemic. Between 2016 and 2022, Britain grew at an annual average of around 1.2 per cent, about the same as France and Germany, and a bit better than persistently sclerotic Italy. Again, not spectacular. Certainly nothing to write home about. But where's the evidence that Brexit has delivered so great a blow to the British economy that we are trailing ignominiously behind our EU counterparts? There is none. The truth is 'Project Fear' - doom-laden prophecies from the likes of George Osborne to frighten us into voting to stay in the EU - has never really gone away. Its adherents latch on to each gloomy forecast, then keep quiet when the forecast is not fulfilled. There is also a steady drip-drip of statistics that give a lopsided picture. For example, earlier this week The Guardian newspaper (which daily carries on the fight against Brexit) ran an article that maintained that Britain 'had the worst exports record of any member of the G7 besides Japan over the last decade'. It turned out the figures covered 2012 to 2021. In other words, for the first four years Britain was still a full member of the EU, and for nearly all the rest of the time a part of its trading arrangements. Our lacklustre export performance in that decade had almost nothing to do with Brexit. There has been a big decline in our export of goods, which fell more than 9 per cent below pre-pandemic levels in the last three months of 2022, the worst performance in the G7. But since 2016 there has also been a boom in the export of services - from banking to accounting to films to design. These exports grew by 17.8 per cent in real terms between 2016 and 2022, the sharpest increase in the G7. And although new trade deals are routinely rubbished by Remainers, our joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, a huge free-trade area of 11 countries spanning the Indo-Pacific, could be momentous. A trade deal with India, soon to be the world's third-biggest economy, is doable. My suggestion isn't that the picture is all sweetness and light - merely that it is better, possibly far better, than you would infer from relentless anti-Brexit propaganda, which has succeeded in changing the minds even of ex-Brexiteers. Moreover, there are financial benefits from leaving the EU which almost no one remembers. We're no longer required to make a net contribution of more than £10 billion a year, and we escaped having to shell out further tens of millions for a post-Covid 'stimulus package' dreamt up by Brussels. Of course, much more needs to be done. Brexit was supposed to free us from bureaucracy and red tape so we would do better than EU countries, not merely keep up with them. That hasn't happened, at least not yet. The Government's recent decision to revoke only about 600 retained EU laws, rather than the 4,000 previously pledged, is a good example of its shameful reluctance to capitalise on the opportunities of Brexit. As a result of their timidity, the Tories have made it easier for Sir Keir Starmer to back-pedal on Brexit should Labour win the election. It can scarcely be in doubt that this is what he - the man who argued for a second EU referendum because he didn't like the first result -wants to do. There will be a chorus of doomsayers, amplified by the BBC, falsely claiming that leaving the EU has led to Britain's impoverishment, and that the only way to reverse our economic decline is to forge closer links with Brussels. But Brexit emphatically hasn't been the disaster we are led to believe. We haven't been left behind. The Government needs to get a move on, though. It should be a work in progress. When did you last hear Rishi Sunak or a Government minister wax lyrical about Brexit? That's the problem. Instead of championing it as a wonderful opportunity, the Government seemingly regards Brexit at best as a burden, and at worst as an embarrassment. And now, with the departure of Boris Johnson - undisciplined and sometimes untrustworthy, yes, but triumphantly right about leaving the EU - Remainers will redouble their efforts to finagle us back into the eager embrace of Brussels. Load-Date: June 14, 2023  End of Document
