   Stormont: Brussels concessions seal power-sharing deal in Northern Ireland thetimes.co.uk January 30, 2024 Tuesday 7:00 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 826 words Byline: Oliver Wright, Policy Editor Highlight: Agreement on new post-Brexit trade deals allays unionist fears and put province on track to revive its government after almost two years Body   Power sharing in Northern Ireland could return by the end of the week after the Democratic Unionist Party ended a two-year stand-off with ministers over the province’s post-Brexit future. Chris Heaton-Harris, the Northern Ireland secretary, will announce legal changes on January 31st to reassure unionists that Northern Ireland is an integral part of the UK’s single economic market, one of the key demands of the DUP. At the same time Brussels will formally announce new rules allowing Northern Ireland to take greater advantage of new UK post-Brexit trade deals.  Jeffery Donaldson, the  DUP  leader, said the agreement would show that the “naysayers are wrong” and that he had secured a deal that would deliver “real change” for Northern Ireland. When the package is published and formally approved by MPs, he is expected to formally re-enter power sharing, going into government as a junior partner to Sinn Fein for the first time. Sources said this was expected to happen “rapidly”, with a plan for Stormont to be up and running by the end of the week. There has been no functioning government in the province since February 2022, when the DUP collapsed the executive in protest against checks on goods entering Northern Ireland from Great Britain as part of the  Northern Ireland protocol . Since then the  province has been run by officials , with limited decision-making powers, which has meant many public sector workers have not been given a pay rise in two years. What does the DUP deal mean for Northern Ireland? As part of the deal, ministers have agreed to pay £3.3 billion to Northern Ireland to help boost public services in the province. The government is also understood to have agreed to new legal commitments to underline the post-Brexit trading relationship between Britain and Northern Ireland. However, the deal will not go as far as to meet unionist demands that there should be no checks at all on goods crossing between Britain and Northern Ireland as a result of Brexit. Donaldson secured his party’s support for the deal after a five-hour meeting of his party’s 100-strong executive on Monday night. However, backing for the agreement was not unanimous, with several senior figures remaining fiercely opposed to restoring power-sharing. Donaldson said when the package was published it would show that he had negotiated a “significant change” that would allow unfettered access to Northern Ireland for goods from Britain.  “On checks, on goods, moving between Great Britain and Northern Ireland and staying within the UK there will no longer be physical checks. That is the same for every part of the United Kingdom,” he said. “On customs paperwork, customs declarations, supplementary declarations will be gone and therefore we believe this represents a significant change. “As far as we are concerned, the green lane will go and be replaced by the UK internal market system that reflects the reality that Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom, that goods flowing within the United Kingdom flow freely. “That was our core key objective and I believe what we have secured represents real change and everybody will be able to see it for themselves.” After a call with Leo Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, Downing Street said Rishi Sunak was “confident” the deal would “pave the way for the restoration of power sharing” in the region. “Both leaders agreed that it was in the people of Northern Ireland’s interests to have stable devolved government,” a spokesman said. Heaton-Harris described the DUP’s move as “a welcome and significant step” after months of private negotiations. “I am pleased the DUP have agreed to accept the package of measures that the UK government has put forward, and as a result they are ready to return to the Northern Ireland assembly and nominate representatives to the Northern Ireland executive,” he said.  “Sir Jeffrey Donaldson has said this is subject to the binding commitments between the Democratic Unionist Party and the UK government — I can confirm that we will stick to this agreement”. Mary Lou McDonald, president of Sinn Fein, said her party had no concerns over the deal, which she said had been reached after “painstaking” work. “We have been in close contact with both governments, and indeed with Brussels,” she said. “We are satisfied that no part of the Good Friday Agreement has been undermined or damaged.” But Jamie Bryson, a loyalist activists who has been an outspoken critic of Donaldson’s attempts to reach a deal, said it would not live up to expectations.  “Sir Jeffrey has set a high standard for himself — zero checks, zero customs paperwork on goods staying in Northern Ireland,” he said. “That requires tearing up the Northern Ireland protocol and fundamentally changing the Windsor framework. He added: “The DUP executive have only seen a PowerPoint presentation presented by those who negotiated the deal. They have not seen the legal text. Let’s see what the legal text actually says”. Load-Date: January 30, 2024  End of Document
