   Sunak's attack on experts feels like Brexit all over again i-news September 22, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 831 words Byline: Paul Waugh Body   During Rishi Sunak's combative interview with Nick Robinson on BBC Radio 4's Today programme yesterday, perhaps the most uncomfortable moment came on the issue of "meat taxes". In his big "reset" speech on Wednesday, the Prime Minister declared that he had "scrapped" such a tax. When Robinson pointed out that no such levy existed and the Committee on Climate Change (CCC) denied his claims that it had ever proposed one, Sunak ended up skewered like a shish kebab. But what was striking was just how hard he tried to pin the blame on the committee, a group of environmental experts with a statutory duty to set fiveyearly carbon budgets and make recommendations to ministers. He was on stronger ground when he said there should be much more scrutiny of what the CCC proposes as the best routes to get to net zero by 2050. From cutting meat-eating (a 20 per cent drop by 2030) to how we drive and heat our homes, the public may be surprised by the scale of the changes envisaged. The Prime Minister is also right to start a debate about whether bans, taxes, incentives or regulation is the best way to change behaviour. Yet the whole point of the committee is to give expert advice on how to cut emissions and set out the possible policy options. As with Covid, ultimately, it's up to ministers to decide, marrying the policy (what is possible) with the politics (what is fairest, for example). The danger is that the Prime Minister ends up sounding like someone who simply doesn't like the independent criticism of his Government's progress. Among the most wounding remarks has been the CCC chairman Chris Stark warning that ministers are already off track on net zero and the latest announcement was "magical thinking" about how to make legal requirements a reality. Given his insistence on detailed figures, it was telling that Sunak failed to say what other emissions cuts would replace those lost from the 2030 electric vehicles delay. His irritation with the CCC feels very much like Liz Truss's irritation with the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), another statutory watchdog whose job is to advise, when it warned last year that her unfunded tax cuts could cost billions of pounds. And there is another parallel that sits ominously in the background, too: Brexit. Sunak's attacks on and misrepresentations of the Climate Change Committee have real echoes of the "we've had enough of experts" rhetoric of the 2016 EU referendum campaign. The Prime Minister appears to be gunning for the committee. He knows he cannot say meat taxes or compulsory car-sharing are Labour policy, but he's happy to suggest (falsely) that they are the brainchild of out-of-touch elitists and to weaponise the whole thing in party adverts. Those who know Sunak well say that this week is about underlining his main belief that politics should be about balancing and publicising the "trade-offs" of big policy issues. On lockdown, for example, he constantly argued as Chancellor that the economic effects were underplayed. He also previewed his big speech by saying "for too many years politicians in governments of all stripes have not been honest about costs and trade-offs" of getting to net zero by 2050. Yet on Brexit itself, Sunak (like Boris Johnson and many others) has failed to show a similar honesty and transparency about both the downsides and upsides of quitting the European Union. What Sunak never highlights is that the OBR has consistently projected that Brexit is causing a 4 per cent hit to UK growth, double that of the Covid pandemic. Of course, there is a perfectly respectable case for saying that Brexit was more a matter of sovereignty than prosperity. Sunak has also been pragmatic about fixing the Northern Ireland Protocol and stopping Jacob Rees- Mogg's "bonfire" of EU rules. But for a man who prides himself on trade-offs and figures, he has failed to admit the extra red tape and costs for business, let alone detail how to counter them. "Spreadsheet Sunak" has remarkably empty spreadsheets for metrics of Brexit success. If Brexit is the biggest political change to Britain of our generation, climate change is the even bigger policy challenge. Expert warnings about the economics of leaving the EU have turned from Project Fear to Project Fact. In his attacks on the net-zero "establishment", Sunak may be repeating that mistake, with even higher stakes for British jobs, influence and our environment. In the 1970s, the TV impressionist Mike Yarwood used to end his shows with the line "and now, this is me", before crooning a final song in his own voice and character. Many viewers found the finale a turn-off. Now that Sunak has declared who he really is - a small-state, low-regulation Brexiteer - it will be interesting to see whether the voters have a similar reaction. For all of his talk of tough tradeoffs, the toughest test will be a general election. Paul Waugh is i's chief political commentator The Prime Minister appears to be gunning for the Committee on Climate Change Load-Date: September 22, 2023  End of Document
