   The clowns took over the Tory show years ago; Moderate Conservatives are worried the party could fall into the hands of extremists: where have they been since 2016? The Times (London) December 19, 2023 Tuesday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 23 Length: 958 words Byline: Hugo Rifkind Body   Who are the Five Families of rightwing Tory rebels? I can't keep up. After the Manson Family and the Addams Family, I sort of lose track. Are they all technically even in the party? Should we add in Sly Farage and the Family Bone? Either way, fear not. For it turns out that their great rivals, the moderate One Nation Caucus of Conservatives, have had enough. "The message to the right," an anonymous MP told The Times, "is 'You've had your turn. Now the grown-ups are in the room'." Because the way things are going, apparently, they are all starting to worry that the party could fall into the hands of "extremists" after the next election. Beginning to worry? After the next election? Where have they been? On Saturday, my colleague Matt Chorley wrote a fun column in these pages about how last week's fight over the Rwanda bill was not the new Brexit. "Not everything has to be the new Brexit," he complained, and he was right. Because it's not the new Brexit. It's the old Brexit. It's the same old people, having the same old fight. The same cast of characters, who have steered the party since 2016 and who still consider themselves to be the immoveable object against which the unstoppable forces of reality will meet their match. Theresa May fought them and lost. Boris Johnson rode them like a pony. Liz Truss became one of them. Now Rishi Sunak scrapes along, hoping they won't hit him too hard. Is this supposed to be a new problem? If these Tory moderates truly believe that, then you wonder why they never spoke to all the colleagues they no longer have. They could start, perhaps, with the last three Conservative chancellors of the exchequer of the pre-Johnson age, Philip Hammond, George Osborne and Kenneth Clarke. None are still MPs. Osborne did an early runner in 2017; the other two had the whip withdrawn in 2019. See also David Gauke, Justine Greening, Dominic Grieve and Oliver Letwin. All cabinet heavyweights once, all pushed out. Or Jo Johnson and Amber Rudd, who resigned in protest, or Rory Stewart, now a podcast god, found last week pondering if he should join the Labour Party. They could ask Ruth Davidson or Ed Vaizey, now my colleagues in the sunnier uplands of Times Radio. Or Nicholas Soames, who got the whip back but had still had enough, or Sam Gyimah and Antoinette Sandbach, who joined the Lib Dems. Or Anna Soubry, Heidi Allen and Sarah Wollaston, already out the door to the mad, doomed Change UK. There will be others I've forgotten, and you have, too. It's not my aim to merely sneer at people I disagree with. You know me; I save that for the weekend. Rather, it's to point out that the Conservative Party today is not what it was. Consider that a value judgment if you must, but it's also a purely objective one. There have always been figures like the preposterous Mark Francois in the party, and all leaders have had to fight them. Yet in the past, when they've claimed to be the true soul of the party, at least they've been wrong. A sane party would not have a Rwanda policy in the first place. Away from the hype and the fight, there's barely a cigarette paper's difference between the version wanted by the rebels, which is harebrained and unworkable, and the version proposed by Sunak, which is also harebrained and unworkable. It is a function of cringing deference to nonsense that the policy even exists, let alone that they basically all ended up voting for it. And this from the party that used to pride itself on being the grown-ups in the room by definition, because that's what Conservatism is. Sobriety, prudence, pragmatism. Remember all that? It is often said that elections are won from the centre. Quoted in The Times, in fact, that's exactly what quite a few of the One Nation MPs said. The great alternative scenario ? clung to by many right-wing Tories and perhaps the government itself ? is supposed to be what Johnson achieved in 2019, winning firmly from the right. What winning from the centre actually means, though, is that people vote for the party that scares them the least, and in 2019 the scary option was Jeremy Corbyn. In the worried heartlands of Middle England, a mophead on a beanbag could have beaten him. Some would argue that it did. Whatever fight the Conservatives pick now, there's little chance of them making Keir Starmer even half as scary to the middle ground as his predecessor. What the Johnson years seem to have robbed them of, though, is that old, staunch, almost noble sense that Conservatives themselves should not be scary to the middle ground at all. Back in 2016, it's worth remembering, a clear majority of Conservative MPs were pro-Remain. You may believe, of course, that there was sobriety, prudence and pragmatism on the other side too, although personally I have always struggled. But afterwards, either way, the Conservative Party changed. Courts, laws, parliament itself, all of them became its enemy. And you either got on board or you got out. Today, the Conservatives are scary. I don't just mean in a Liz Truss way, like an unexpected midnight clown at the end of your bed. I mean that they feel flighty, erratic, unmoderated, prone to alarming lurches. With Brexit, after so many years of fights and votes and stasis, I can understand why even some moderate MPs just sighed and waved it through. But Rwanda? They all knew it was nonsense, from the PM who proposed it, to the home secretary who advanced it, to the supposed moderates themselves, and they all voted for it anyway. And we're supposed to believe that the grown-ups are back in the room? Come on. What bloody grown-ups? It's been a kindergarten for years. I understand why some moderates waved Brexit through. But Rwanda? Rishi Sunak scrapes along, hoping they won't hit him too hard Load-Date: December 19, 2023  End of Document
