   The harsh reality of Brexit has left UK with serious food for thought Belfast Telegraph August 12, 2023 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: REVIEW;FEATURES; Pg. 15 Length: 329 words Byline: GEORGE WORKMAN Body   BREXIT fantasies are now being superseded by unpalatable Brexit reality. The UK has again been forced to postpone plans to "take back control of our borders", because they simply don't work. Two years into Brexit and the UK still has no customs regime in place for EU food imports. Jacob Rees-Mogg erroneously claimed Brexit would reduce food costs by 20% in 2017. However, it has become clear, because the UK no longer recognises EU safety standards, red tape has actually increased food prices and contributed to high inflation. The government is close to conceding its hard Brexit vision is unworkable. All it can do is to mask its chronic incompetence by continually kicking the can (customs deadline) down the road. The UK is currently not checking anything that comes in from the EU. We also have the Windsor Framework fiasco. So much for "taking back control". Some will argue the answer is to purchase cheaper food products from outside the EU. But these are produced to significantly lower animal hygiene and welfare standards. US agriculture is based on industrial scale intensive farming. Substantially higher levels of food poisoning in the US bear testimony to the poor sanitation in farming there. Do people really want this cheaper, contaminated and potentially toxic food? And, given the health risks, these "cheap" imports would generate additional customs checks, and consequently costs. None of this would have happened if the UK had accepted EU safety standards. Realignment with EU standards seems the obvious solution. This would facilitate the import of higher quality food from Europe at a reasonable price. It's a win-win. Polls show Brexit regret is at an all-time high. The public is allowed to change its mind, especially when it is clear this hard Brexit is eroding the UK's social, economic and political fabric. The UK must escape from its democratic dystopia, where both major parties seem trapped in a pernicious Brexit cul-de-sac. GEORGE WORKMAN Co Dublin Load-Date: October 31, 2023  End of Document
