   The euro clearing ‘victory’ that isn’t as clear-cut as it appears thetimes.co.uk February 23, 2024 Friday 5:15 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 1170 words Byline: Patrick Hosking, Financial Editor | Mehreen Khan, Economics Editor Highlight: The European Union provisionally has agreed that London can continue to dominate the clearing of euro-denominated derivatives, at least for a while Body   In the course of more than a decade, a byzantine bit of pipework deep in the world’s financial plumbing has come to attain vast symbolic importance, not only for bankers and regulators but also for everyone interested in the power dynamics between Britain and the European Union. The clearing of euro-denominated derivatives might not be a normal topic of conversation down at the Dog and Duck, but it has become a litmus test of Britain’s post-Brexit future in general and the City’s ability to sell in the European market, in particular. This esoteric activity has been regarded as particularly important, becoming the only City service granted so-called temporary equivalence by Brussels, meaning that the bloc’s policymakers are satisfied that the existing UK supervision and rules are good enough to be relied upon. Moreover, this month the City was able to declare a victory of sorts after the EU provisionally agreed that London, which handles about 90 per cent of this business, could continue to dominate, at least for a while.  Brussels agreed to only relatively modest tweaks to the existing regime . While in future EU-based financial institutions must have accounts with EU-based clearers and must channel a minimum amount of business through them, they will still be allowed to push the bulk of their trades through London. At one point, it looked as though 25 per cent of the business would go to Europe; now it will be much less, according to industry estimates. UK Finance, the trade body for British banking, called it a “victory for pragmatism”. The  London Stock Exchange Group welcomed it, albeit with some reservations, while global banks regard it as a promising portent of things to come. It appeared to be a significant climbdown for the European Central Bank and other continental regulators, which for years had argued that such a fundamental process had to take part in the EU and under the close eye of its officials. Their argument was simple. Complex derivatives with a face value of about €500 trillion, something like five times the world’s entire gross domestic product, change hands each year, most of them passing through London. Derivatives are the securities that are priced off currencies, interest rates and bond prices by which banks and investors hedge risk or speculate. Smooth clearing ensures that deals are completed even in the event of one of the counterparties going bust and acts as a crucial shock-absorber. There was a danger of financial panic and economic instability if something went wrong. It was out of the question, therefore, that such activity should not be under the purview of EU regulators. There was political dimension to this, too. For some in Europe, Britain needed to be seen to be punished for Brexit, if only to deter other countries in the 27-member trading bloc from following its example. As François Hollande, the former French leader, once put it, grabbing euro clearing back from the UK would “serve as a lesson”. There was also the narrow profit argument. Why should the UK-based London Stock Exchange Group, which owns the dominant LCH clearing house, continue to benefit when there were organisations within the EU that would love to grab some of this lucrative business? Yet to see this as a triumph for City lobbyists and British diplomacy does not tell the whole story. According to those close to the negotiations, the UK-favourable deal was struck because EU-based banks were in favour of it, backed by some powerful member states, including France. Indeed, France sealed the deal, according to the Politico website: “France decided to firmly row in behind its banks, backing their stance that they stood to lose international business and face higher costs if euro clearing was forced over the Channel.” That view was confirmed by a senior source familiar with the negotiations: “BNP Paribas were really vociferous in their arguments with regulators. This was less about what Britain was saying and far more about what European banks were saying.” In addition, Paris was eager to push for a softer line against London because  Eurex, the clearing house that is a subsidiary of Deutsche Börse , was in line to be the main beneficiary. “Moving euro clearing to Frankfurt would not only cause pain to France’s banks but would put a spanner in the works of Paris’s dream of being the EU’s top financial centre,” Politico said. The turf war seems to have extended to regulators as well as financiers. The Paris-based European Securities and Markets Authority has at least some power over non-EU clearing houses such as LCH, but paradoxically would have had less say over business processed through Eurex, which would be overseen by domestic German regulators. According to Nicola Watkinson, international managing director at TheCityUK, the lobby group: “This was one of the occasions where the French authorities were on our side. I don’t think we can see this necessarily as a precedent for where future discussions go, but we do hope it’s a sign of pragmatism.” Europe’s politicians don’t necessarily see things that way, arguing that it is the big American investment banks that are the largest beneficiaries. “The French government has once again not taken a European perspective but has done the bidding of large US investment banks,” Markus Ferber, a German member of the European parliament, said.  Attitudes in Brussels to any further accommodation with Britain will depend in part on elections to the European parliament this summer. These will determine how pragmatic the official EU doctrine of “open, strategic autonomy”, which is seen as contradictory anyway, turns out to be. One key test is how the EU interprets and enforces so-called forced relocation, the requirement that key jobs and activities in global banks are physically done within EU jurisdictions. So far about 7,000 roles have moved from the UK to the EU, according to one estimate by EY, far less than the worst predictions ahead of Brexit. The grabbing of euro clearing from Britain has always been an emotional topic. In 2011, long before Brexit, the European Central Bank’s push to bring clearing from London into the narrow eurozone club was ruled illegal by the EU’s courts. The dispute simmered on and was reignited after the Brexit vote in 2016.  Xavier Rolet , the chief executive of London Stock Exchange Group at that time, claimed that 100,000 British jobs could be lost directly and indirectly if this prize was removed. Nevertheless, the loss was seen as inevitable.  Sir Charlie Bean , the former Bank of England deputy governor, told the Lords financial affairs committee that it was “certain” Britain would lose the business, adding he had “absolutely no doubt at all” that it would be taken back into the eurozone. Eight years on, that fear has not materialised, but it is too early to be confident that euro clearing is safe in British hands in the long run, or that this concession signals a new era of greater pragmatism and more open borders for financial services. Load-Date: February 23, 2024  End of Document
