   The "counter-Brexit" has begun: Britain returns to Europe's universities and the scientific world CE Noticias Financieras English September 8, 2023 Friday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1026 words Body   Brexit is beginning to be a huge disappointment to the British people because of its aftermath, never discussed in their campaign. With next year's general election months away, Britain will rejoin the European Union's scientific program. A huge joy and relief for its scientific community. After two years of absence following Brexit, in a long-awaited move, it will be seen as a boost for research and relations with Brussels. The next step would be to re-enter the Erasmus program for undergraduates to study at universities on the continent, as in pre-Brexit . Rishi Sunak is expected to confirm Britain's associate membership of the Horizon scheme on Thursday after months of financial talks, saying science and research are "critical to a brighter economic future." The prime minister praised Horizon as the "right deal" for the UK. "Innovation has long been the foundation of prosperity in the UK, from advances that improve healthcare to technological breakthroughs that grow our economy," Sunak said, before leaving for the G20 in India. "With a wealth of knowledge and expertise to bring to the global stage, we have secured an agreement , which allows UK scientists to participate with confidence in the world's largest collaborative research program - Horizon Europe" he stated . "We have worked with our EU partners to ensure that this is the right deal for the UK, unlocking unparalleled research opportunities and also the right deal for UK taxpayers" he said. The Horizon program The £81 billion Horizon program is the main trans-European research funding mechanism. British scientists were among the biggest beneficiaries before Brexit. Scientists say the scheme offers large grants, which are not available elsewhere. For them, being excluded from the scheme makes it much harder to lead international projects from Britain. There is "great relief" in Whitehall, the London ministry area, that a deal has been struck. Leading researchers will be delighted with the decision to rejoin, after months of increasingly manifest frustration at Britain's absence. Brussels had been blocking British membership, until Sunak's Windsor framework agreement on the Northern Ireland protocol paved the way for negotiations. However, Sunak has been skeptical about a plan, which he considers bureaucratic and unimaginative. He spent months trying to cut costs. Britain demanded compensation for two years of lost funding due to the Northern Ireland standoff, and a system to ensure that the U.K. did not pay much more than it received in subsidies. An agreement has been reached, which will offer Britain a refund, with only "procedural issues" remaining to be finalized. British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak watches the construction of an electric racing car and talks to the student racing team. Reuters photo. "Our priority and preference is to partner with Horizon. But we want to make sure it is on the right terms, both for the British taxpayer and for British science and research," Sunak said. The agreement will mark another step on the road to a better relationship with the EU, following the difficult Brexit negotiations. "The UK's scientific talent and ambition should not have to wait another minute for funding and certainty to be able to bring their ideas, jobs and our economy to life," said Sir Keir Starmer Plan for science Horizon is a funding scheme for science. However, membership is about much more than money; if that were all there was to it, then the government's promise to fund any UK application would have solved the problem. What Horizon does is facilitate cooperation. Institutions across the EU can work together, apply for grants and drive research together. If they are not in Horizon, all that is much more difficult. You can't lead consortia, you can't be part of the governance of the programs. Historically, the UK has done very well with Horizon. In the Brexit negotiations, which so often seemed zero-sum, both sides saw a deal on Horizon as a win-win. For this reason, associate membership was supposed to come quickly when, in 2020, both the EU and the UK said they wanted it. But it was held up by negotiations with Northern Ireland. When, in February, that impasse was broken, it was again assumed that Horizon would follow suit quickly. It didn't. The delay has been partly about money. After a pause, with the last tranche of funding now underway, no one is entirely sure how fast the UK will grow. It is too late for Britain's scientific "plan B," Rishi Sunak was told, as he was urged to rejoin the EU research scheme. Senior Conservatives are telling the prime minister that "the window of opportunity has passed" for Britain to set up its own research program. They want him to override Treasury cost considerations and commit to the Horizon program to show he is making progress before the election. The voice of the scientists Scientists have openly urged the government to rejoin the scheme, in which Britain played a leading role before Brexit. It gives scientists access to large grants and cross-border research programs. Sir Paul Nurse, director of the Francis Crick Institute, on Wednesday urged Sunak to stop "fiddling while U.K. science burns" and join Horizon. In February, Sunak surprised Westminster by reorganizing Whitehall to establish an independent science department, giving institutional form to his belief that Britain's future growth will come from cultivating innovation and harvesting its fruits. It was natural then that, when talks with the EU were unblocked a month later through his Windsor Framework agreement, many expected a prime minister who aspired to make Britain a scientific superpower to seize the opportunity to rejoin Horizon. British scientists are almost unanimous in their belief that participation in the scheme is essential: not only does it give access to a multimillion-dollar pool of grants, but it enables cross-border research programs that have proved bureaucratically unfeasible by other routes. During the two years that Britain has been excluded from the scheme, researchers have complained of seeing the leadership of projects that could have been run from Britain move overseas. PB Load-Date: September 9, 2023  End of Document
