   The Brexit wars are back – and this time it really is about immigration telegraph.co.uk November 16, 2023 Thursday 2:02 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 678 words Byline: By Tom Harris Highlight: Remember the performative outrage, the invective Body   Welcome back to the Brexit wars. I bet you missed them! It’s not quite the same as that period when the British Parliament embarrassed the entire country, and refused to honour the result of the 2016 EU referendum while pretending to the outside world – and itself – that it was trying to do exactly that. Remember the scenes with horror: the performative outrage, the subterfuge, the invective across the chamber, staunch Remainer MPs desperately trying to convince their angry constituents that of course they supported leaving the EU – they voted for it in the Commons, didn’t they? Except they didn’t. At every opportunity, even when presented with a chance to secure a “soft” Brexit with Theresa May’s “stopgap” deal, they obfuscated, delayed and sabotaged, hoping that if they held out long enough, an opportunity might come along to reverse the decision. The whole farrago ended justly, but now it feels like we’re about to revisit that shameful era. But this time the subject is rather different. Instead of MPs’ refusal to honour the result of a referendum, we are set for an almighty battle over illegal immigration. In the blue team we have the Prime Minister and, I suspect, a majority of the British people, versus, on the red team, the opposition parties and just enough Conservative MPs to make any substantial change to the system all but impossible. Rishi Sunak yesterday announced emergency legislation  to decree that Rwanda is, in fact, a safe place to which asylum seekers can be sent. This was in response to the decision of the Supreme Court that the scheme as it currently stands is illegal. Sunak understands that his slim chances of remaining in Number 10 beyond the next election would narrow to zero were he to give up on securing a radical solution that would prevent hundreds of small boats arriving on our shores from France every year. Conversely, Keir Starmer oversaw no diminishing of Labour’s significant opinion poll lead, even after announcing he would scrap the Rwanda scheme were it to get off the ground between now and polling day. This is Sunak’s problem, not Starmer’s, and the future of his administration depends on its resolution. So are we to be subject once more to unedifying scenes of MPs emoting in the chambers, often for the benefit of their social media feeds, as they warn of the plight of migrants finding themselves on a one-way flight to east Africa? Must we hear repeated assurances that every single person who arrives in a rubber dinghy in Kent is a genuine refugee, not an economic migrant? Unlike the technical subject of Brexit, which can be interpreted to mean many different things, the debate over immigration is more straightforward. Though both are underpinned by the notion of sovereignty. Does the Labour Party really want to go into the election against a Conservative Party whose slogan is “Get Rwanda Done ”? There is a fundamental difference, however, between now and then. Theresa May and Boris Johnson struggled to get support for their strategies mainly because they had no majority and too many of their own MPs were willing to lend Labour a hand in its efforts to delay or cancel Brexit. Rishi Sunak already enjoys a healthy majority; if he cannot push reform through now, he is hardly likely to be able to do so if he hangs on to office with a vastly reduced majority. This is an issue that must be settled this side of the election or not at all. Labour and the other opposition parties need to be careful, almost as careful as the Prime Minister must be as he navigates a way forward. Starmer has been able successfully to steer clear of the Rwanda scheme as an issue, aside from his promise to scrap it. But if the debate develops in such a way that his MPs end up defending publicly the rights of immigrants to remain in the UK even after taking an elastic approach to Britain’s immigration application processes, then even a Sunak government that has failed to launch the Rwanda scheme might be regarded with a degree of patience and sympathy by those Red Wall voters Labour needs for success. Load-Date: November 16, 2023  End of Document
