   The anti-Brexit megaphone the British government wants to silence CE Noticias Financieras English June 4, 2023 Sunday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 719 words Body   Who. Steve Bray (54) has been demonstrating against Brexit in front of the British Parliament for six years and has created the Stand of Defiance European Movement platform. What. His megaphone has been seized several times by the police and he is facing increasing harassment by the government's anti-protest laws.  Why. Bray and his 'crew' defy warnings: 'We all live in the tragedy of Brexit'. Steve Bray is fed up with having his megaphone played. For more than six years, the now known as Stop Brexit Man has been demonstrating in front of the British Parliament, barricaded with his crew on that traffic island in Westminster that has something of a pirate ship or yellow submarine, dancing to the sound of the Beatles with the lyrics adapted to the times we live in : "We all live in the tragedy of Brexit". "The police have not left us alone for a year, when they pulled out of their sleeve that fascist law with which they intend to ban all kinds of demonstrations with the excuse that they disturb the public," laments Bray amid a sea of blue flags and amid the pro-European hubbub of his long of twenty supporters. The new Public Order Law has gone even further, as the Republican demonstrators were well aware during the coronation of Charles III. The latest threat is the Government's attempt to use so-called Henry VIII clauses to amend legislation that was defeated on its way through the House of Lords and which seeks to ban protests that have "a cumulative effect" and cause an impact on the daily lives of citizens. "Something else is afoot and we can tell because the police pressure is mounting," Bray complains. "They threaten to take away our megaphone again. They advise us not to obstruct the circulation of pedestrians on the traffic island. They no longer know what to invent to silence us.... But we are not going to keep quiet. The Italian anti-fascist song Bella Ciao is already part of the soundtrack of the troupe led by the Stop Brexit Man. In his day they sang Bye Bye Boris to Johnson until he resigned. And in recent weeks they have added to the repertoire a version of Tom Jones' Delilah, retitled Why, why, why Suella, dedicated to Home Secretary Suella Braverman. "Controlling immigration was just another fantasy, exports have plummeted, the shopping basket has gone up more than in the whole of Europe," laments Steve Bray. "Where are the famous Brexit dividends - how long are we going to keep swallowing this pack of lies?". Farage's antithesis Since he began his crusade six years ago, Bray has become something of the antithesis of Nigel Farage, once christened by Trump as Mr. Brexit. "And yet Farage has at least had the courage to acknowledge in public that Brexit has failed, something the Tories, not even Labour, who have fallen into an unforgivable pact of silence, do not deign to admit," says Bray. A 54-year-old native of Wales, he campaigned for Remain in the June 2016 referendum, futilely trying to convince his neighbors of the benefit Port Talbot had derived from European funds. After the Brexit victory, he turned to online activism. Tired of spending the day arguing with trolls, he decided to go offline and head to London with his banners and hat. He left behind his profession as an electrical engineer, sold part of his numismatic collection, and with that he had enough money to endure the first year in the British capital, in Theresa May's time. His loud protests grew with Boris Johnson, until the day he sat on a toilet in Downing Street, protesting against the Conservatives' boycott of a law that aimed to prevent untreated discharges into rivers. "Brexit was the beginning of something bigger," he laments. "It was a carte blanche for deregulation, corruption, social cuts, the suppression of our most fundamental rights, from strikes to protests. I have seen four prime ministers pass in all this time, and all the indecency and immorality of our politicians has come out." "People are starting to get very fed up with it all," assures Steve Bray, who refers to the recent Focaldata poll: 63% of Britons think that Brexit has created more problems than it has solved. "It is not too late to return to the EU, as they would have us believe. But the task before us is even bigger: we need to change the political system that got us headlong into this mess." Load-Date: June 5, 2023  End of Document
