   Thousands of Britons demonstrate in London against Brexit: "We're going back to the European Union!" CE Noticias Financieras English September 23, 2023 Saturday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 589 words Body   Under the slogans "We will return" and "Give us back our star!", thousands of Britons have furrowed this Saturday the center of London with EU flags in the so-called Rejoin March, which started timidly in Hyde Park and ended up curdling in one of the largest anti-Brexit demonstrations in the last three years, with a sea of blue flags along Piccadilly. The march was however marked by the absence of political leaders, amid the debate sparked by Labour's Keir Starmer, who has promised to "rewrite" the Brexit deal if he gets to Downing Street but has expressly renounced to return to the European Union. Today 58% of Britons are in favor of re-entry compared to 32% who favor remaining outside the EU, according to the average of the polls extracted by the portal What UK thinks. Activist Gina Miller (who once took Brexit to court) and Belgian MEP and former Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt were the most recognizable faces next to the banner that opened the march in London. Alongside them was Steve Bray, who has been tirelessly demonstrating in front of Parliament for five years despite police harassment. "No one wants to acknowledge what a disaster Brexit has been, neither the government nor the Labour opposition," Bray denounced. "Much of the country is still in a state of denial and doesn't want to accept the truth. They keep mocking us, they keep calling us remoaners (those who keep complaining). But it's very important to keep the message and hope alive." The Beatles' version of Yellow Submarine (We all live in a Brexit Tragedy) provided the musical backdrop to the march, in competition with Hey Jude/Hey EU and Beethoven's Ode to Joy. Opening the march was also Charlotte Morrow, 60, an Englishwoman with Canadian and Ukrainian blood, pushing the cart where her Irish dog (Pipin) and her French dog (Pebbles) were traveling with all the European paraphernalia.... "This has always been an open and tolerant country, and it needs to be again. It is very important to defend those values and to remind the world that those who voted for Brexit are and remain a minority." With his daughter Isabela on his shoulders, the British Tim Robinson (40 years old) twisted his face when we asked him if returning to the EU is today a realistic proposal... "I believe that the return will be slow but steady, if there is a change of government. I believe that we will return little by little, and that my daughter will be able to participate in the Erasmus program one day. But Starmer can and has to be braver, although I understand her caution."  Greg Melville, 23, a university student and Green Party activist, sees things in a different color.... "I can't wait. I want to have the same right my older brothers had to study and work in Europe. We are fed up with the hypocrisy of our politicians and the fact that no one dares to say 'Brexit was a mistake'."  There was also representation at the Rejoin March from Bremain in Spain, led by Sue Wilson, who has not missed a single pro-European march since the referendum campaign. Clarissa Killwic, of the Brexpats group, denounced "the loss of rights that has affected the daily lives" of Britons living in EU countries.  The demonstration broke up in the early afternoon in front of the British Parliament and deserved more coverage in the international media than in the local media. Conservative newspapers, such as The Daily Express, described the demonstrators as "desperate Rejoiners" while the GBNews channel predicted an "epic failure" and downplayed the number of attendees. Load-Date: September 24, 2023  End of Document
