   Through the looking glass with Richard Tice, Farage’s plummy PA thetimes.co.uk January 3, 2024 Wednesday 6:40 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 689 words Byline: Tom Peck Highlight: The Reform party leader has grown so used to fielding questions about whether his Brexit compatriot will return, he supplies the answers in advance Body   The Reform party is the anti-Trigger’s broom of British politics. It’s had 18 different names but it’s still the same head, still the same handle. That they managed to summon so many people to their new year press conference was entirely because of a deliberately ambiguous promise that the famous broomhead himself might make an appearance — but in the end only the handle made it. Technically, Reform UK is led by the public school-educated, Isle of Wight-based property millionaire and authentic man of the people Richard Tice, who is surely the first person in British political history to combine the role of party leader and PA. Absolutely all of his mercifully few speeches are quickly given over to fielding questions about where “honorary president” Nigel Farage is and when he might be coming back, to the extent that he now answers that question before it’s even been asked. If the pair of them can even be regarded as a double act then so can Alan Partridge and Lynn. Where was Nigel?  It was, Tice explained, too early to say . “Nigel is the master of political timing,” he said. And if he is going to come back it sadly wasn’t going to be today, or maybe ever, but he didn’t really know. What he did know, though, is that Reform UK is going to shake up British politics. It’s going to provide a “real alternative” — the same real alternative that in all bar one of the 11 by-elections of the past couple of years has not proved quite real enough to hold on to its deposit. The promised “special guests” turned out mainly to be the ex-GB News presenter Alexandra Phillips. “Reform is creeping up in the polls, and that is why you are all here,” she said, seemingly unaware that the reason we were all here was because we were expecting  Nigel Farage , not her. She is right, though, that Reform is creeping up in the polls. They are hovering about the 10 per cent mark and threatening to peel off enough Tory voters to really ruin  Rishi Sunak ’s life. Trying to understand what’s going on with Reform UK is a frankly unsettling exercise in working out who it is that’s gone through the looking glass — them, the rest of us, or both. Reform UK to challenge Tories in every seat at general election You have to sit there and watch Richard Tice summon up as much pantomime anger as a plummy property developer from Uppingham School can muster, while he blames the Tory party for having “broken Britain”. For having, for example, “still not taken advantage of the huge opportunities of Brexit”.  There was once, you may recall, a cabinet minister for “Brexit opportunities”, one Jacob Rees-Mogg. By the time the position was made redundant the only opportunity he had successfully identified was the theoretical possibility of purchasing high-powered South Korean vacuum cleaners, should the South Koreans wish to go through the necessary regulatory pain of trying to sell us them, which they do not. There are a great many people out there who share Tice’s view that the Tory party has broken Britain, but they tend to think that Brexit may have had something to do with it. What Tice seems to think is the problem is that Sunak and Starmer are exactly the same. He even came with a little PowerPoint slide where he’d merged their faces and called them “the socialist twins”. The people, Tice reckons, are crying out for something new. What they’re crying out for, he reckons, is the kind of very right-wing, kamikaze deregulation that only Reform UK can offer, on the one tiny condition that you’re prepared to forget that Liz Truss already did it and it was a truly historic disaster. Last time round in 2019, Reform UK was still called the Brexit Party and its then leader, Nigel Farage, did Boris Johnson an enormous favour by acting as a kind of right-wing gateway drug to Labour voters who would never vote Tory and didn’t want to vote Corbyn, thus clearing the path to victory via the red wall. This time round, they know it’s not going to be like that. There’s a chance they could play their part in wiping the floor with the Conservatives but that’s about it. And, as even Trigger knows, you can’t wipe the floor with just the handle. Load-Date: January 3, 2024  End of Document
