   too marr Andrew Marr in row with Brexiteer as he hurls ‘gammon’ insult in rowdy The Ayes Have It! The Ayes Have It! show thesun.co.uk November 24, 2023 Friday 11:24 PM GMT  Copyright 2023 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: BIZARRE,SHOWBIZ,BREXIT; Version:1 Length: 456 words Byline: Amanda Devlin Highlight: Fresh from its popular run at the Edinburgh Fringe, the production-dreamt up by ex-MP Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh-landed in Leicester Square Theatre this week Body   FOUR years since shouting “order order” for the final time in the House of Commons, John Bercow  has reprised his role of keeping rowdy debaters in check. He’s swapped Parliament  for a role on stage in The Ayes Have It! The Ayes Have It! Fresh from its popular run at the Edinburgh Fringe , the production – dreamt up by ex-MP Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh – landed in Leicester Square Theatre this week. Despite it being there for one night only, there’s chatter about taking the brilliant concept – that puts politics  on centre stage – on the road. “This house believes that Brexit  has been a disaster and now must be reversed,” Mr Bercow says, before making way for speakers to argue their point of view against the opposing side. Scotland‘s former First Minister Alex Salmond  leads the Ayes team, which includes Remain activist Gina Miller  and LBC’s Andrew Marr. Mr Salmond captivates the crowd with his brilliantly sarcastic tone as he manages to pass off cheeky gags while still delivering a powerful debate. He got an easy ride from the London audience, which was jam-packed with anti-Tory Remainers, as he argued Brexit has been a “disaster”. The mass weren’t so forgiving with the Nos side however, led by ex-Brexit Secretary David Davis  MP. But it was TalkTV ‘s Mike Graham who packed a punch when it was his turn to perform. The presenter was the most entertaining of the line-up – bringing the stage to life with his hilarious put-downs.  It was clear he revelled in winding up the hecklers – who were tripping over themselves to have a go. “Will all you remoaners please stop complaining about Brexit just because you fall over and hurt your wrists?,” he ranted. Mr Salmond and Mr Graham proved to be the perfect double act on opposing sides as they brought humour to their swordplay to break up a heavy debate. The female speakers, Ms Miller and Baroness Claire Fox, had a tougher time from the audience as they were jeered from the sidelines. Things got feisty when Mr Marr hurled an insult at the Nos after Mr Graham exclaimed: “These are the people that are the elites, that think they’re better than the working class.” Mr Marr hit back: “We have Salmond on our side, they have gammon on their side.” It’s this perfect mix of ‘cast’ that creates a fiery and impassioned debate, improved only by the added bonus of Cora and Dominic – two Year 13 students from Chestnut Grove Academy – who argued for and against Brexit. The brave pair were praised by former Speaker Mr Bercow before he opened the floor to questions from the audience. He then announced the Ayes did indeed have it.  It’ll be no surprise in the future however, to hear that the show is going on a UK tour. Its lively format would also make for an interesting spot on TV. Stay tuned… Load-Date: November 24, 2023  End of Document
