   Tory reluctance will create space for a Farage-led uprising The Express January 20, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 14 Length: 772 words Byline: Patrick O'Flynn Body   FOLLOWERS of cycle racing will know that teams do not tend to send their best riders to the front until late in the contest. It is common instead to see half a dozen riders in the same bright team colours whizzing along in a column. Usually the real contender is at the back, getting a smooth ride while his colleagues take a buffeting from the wind. When the home straight hoves into view these riders part like the Red Sea in the Bible and the champ powers through. There are plenty of jittery Tory MPs who fear that these are the team orders being followed by the Reform UK party. Ever since Rishi Sunak moved left by sacking Suella Braverman and bringing back David Cameron, the right-wing Reform has been doing rather well under leader Richard Tice. Its average opinion poll rating has doubled from five to ten per cent, while its performance in parliamentary by-elections has also been improving. In two recent contests, the number of votes attracted by Reform was greater than the margin by which the Tory candidate lost to Labour. Just this week there was a poll placing Reform at a record 12 per cent, with the Tories only eight points ahead. With Conservative voters disenchanted not just by immigration policy but also on matters as varied as high taxation, soft law and order and the expense of the dash to net zero, the naturally cheery Mr Tice is getting more TV air-time and not just on the GB News network where he is a presenter. REFORM has staked out territory to the right of the Tories at just the moment when habitual Tory voters are looking for a trenchant alternative to their own party's fence-sitting and half-measures. Two other members of the Reform peloton - its deputy leader Ben Habib and his fellow former Brexit Party MEP Rupert Lowe - are about to do their own stints at the front as candidates in forthcoming byelections in traditional Tory seats in Wellingborough in Northamptonshire and Kingswood in Gloucestershire. Originally the party said it would only contest the former seat, but this week it announced that Mr Lowe - ironically a former chairman of Rishi Sunak's favourite football team Southampton - will run in Kingswood after what it termed "overwhelming public demand". After the debacle and division surrounding Sunak's latest Rwanda legislation, these two by-elections on February 15 are perfectly timed for Reform. So can Lowe and Habib chalk up vote shares that will propel the party to another level? There is every chance of that. Wellingborough in particular has proved a fruitful hunting ground for parties to the right of the Tories. At the 2015 general election, UKIP came second there with a vote share of almost 20 per cent, while the Brexit Party won a 39.5 per cent vote share in the Wellingborough district in the 2019 European elections. Students of recent political history will clock that these challenger parties, UKIP, Brexit Party and Reform, have one thing in common: a certain Mr Nigel Farage. He was a founder member of UKIP as well as the leader under whom it broke through. He set up and led the "pop-up" Brexit Party to a breathtaking victory in those 2019 Euro elections, crushing Theresa May's Tories in the process. And then he instigated Reform UK as its successor once Brexit was done. Right now he is the man at the back of the Reform peloton, dropping hints that he may soon move to the front but clearly biding his time. As President of Reform, Farage has largely left it to Tice to do the hard yards through the midterm. But both men know who is the superstar with previous stellar wins under his belt. WHILE Farage understands that our firstpast-the-post electoral system is a formidable obstacle against minor parties breaking through, he also has a better nose for trends in public opinion than almost anyone on the political scene. The depth of public disenchantment with all the establishment parties seems unprecedented. The prospects for an insurgency based on the touchstone issue of immigration control have seldom appeared better. Just to further fray Tory nerves, I have heard it said that Farage could leave it until as late as September to announce whether he will take over the reins at Reform for the general election campaign. How the party fares in Wellingborough and Kingswood will surely be a major influence on the call he finally makes. If it can chalk up real votes to match its poll scores, it will be game on. For the third time in a row, Tory reluctance to implement full-strength Conservative policies will have created space for a Farage-led uprising. Will they never learn? 'Nigel drops hints about moving to the front but bides his time' Graphic    ON POINT: Nigel Farage is perfectly placed to leadPicture: HUMPHREY NEMAR Load-Date: January 20, 2024  End of Document
