   Truckers and ports clash on post-Brexit border fees; Import charges Financial Times (London, England) September 15, 2023 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 518 words Byline: OLIVER TELLING; PETER FOSTER Body   The logistics industry is split over the cost of post-Brexit border checks on food and fresh produce, heaping pressure on the government as it seeks to finalise the long-delayed measures. Transport groups have "strongly opposed" a government proposal to charge an "exceptionally high" flat fee of up to £43 on animal and plant products entering the UK via Wales and the Kent coast, warning that it would further drive up food inflation. But port operators have called on the government to enforce the charge more widely, arguing this would help them recoup investments in the multimillion pound border facilities that they were forced to build in preparation for Brexit. The conflicting demands underline business leaders' broad concerns over the belated introduction of border checks on EU imports more than three years after the UK left the bloc. The concerns emerged after the government set out plans this year to charge a flat fee of £20 to £43 on all imports eligible for checks at two government-run inspection points near Dover and Holyhead, Wales, where ports did not have sufficient land to build their own facilities. But the planned charge, which will be used to cover operational costs, has been strongly criticised by lobby group Logistics UK, whose members include the trucking companies. It said the proposed range was "exceptionally high" and up to double the charge per truck imposed by the Port of Dover, according to a letter sent in July and seen by the Financial Times. Transport groups have already absorbed the cost of higher inflation and the extra charges would inevitably be passed on to consumers, said Nichola Mallon, Logistics UK head of trade, in the letter. In a separate letter sent the same month, however, Portsmouth International Port backed a flat fee to cover inspections and warned the government against setting the charge so low that it undercut privately owned ports and diverted all food imports through government-run facilities in Kent. Director Mike Sellers said that Portsmouth port, which is the UK's bestconnected port to Europe and a major entry point for food imports, had been forced to make a "significant capital investment" in developing its roughly two-acre site, adding that "the recovery of these costs is hugely challenging". His concerns reflect those raised by other UK port operators, after repeated delays to introducing post-Brexit border checks have left them with empty hightech facilities they said risk becoming multimillion pound "white elephants". One port industry insider said ministers' decision to split responsibility between government and business for regulating imports post-Brexit had created a "pretty intractable problem". Richard Ballantyne, head of the British Ports Association, said a number of ports had called for the government to enforce a flat fee across the country, not only at state-run entry points. "We understand why many [others in the industry] are lobbying against any costs or checks," he said. "But [ports] are stuck with these big white elephants of Brexit ... With every extra month of delay, they are a cost drain." Load-Date: September 14, 2023  End of Document
