   Tusk uses Brexit slogan despite saying Leavers had place in hell The Daily Telegraph (London) July 6, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 15 Length: 387 words Byline: James Crisp Body   DONALD TUSK, who told Brexiteers they had a "special place in hell" when he was European Council president, has adopted the "Take Back Control" slogan for his Polish election campaign. During the Brexit negotiations in 2019, Mr Tusk criticised supporters of Brexit for trying to leave the EU. But now he has echoed Vote Leave's motto in a video attacking the incumbent Law and Justice party, as he seeks to become Poland's prime minister. "Poles must regain control over their country and its borders!" Mr Tusk said, before criticising Law and Justice for failing to stop migrants from Islamic countries arriving in Poland. Mr Tusk's calls on Britons to reconsider Brexit made him the scourge of Brexiteers during the talks on Britain's EU departure. The former prime minister described Brexit as "the real end" of the British Empire and humiliated Theresa May at an EU summit in Salzburg. In 2018, he posted a photo of himself offering the then prime minister a slice of cake, captioned "sorry, no cherries", a reference to supposed British "cherrypicking" in the tense Brexit talks. Mr Tusk is not the first EU politician to steal some of Vote Leave's referen dum-winning tactics after returning to domestic politics from Brussels after the Brexit negotiations. Michel Barnier, the former Brexit negotiator, called for a "legal shield" for France from the European courts, as well as a referendum on a moriatum on non-EU migration, during his run in last year's French presidential elections. Law and Justice is anti-migrant and is, along with Hungary, opposing EU moves to set up a mandatory system of migrant relocation across the bloc. Mr Tusk said the way to stop migrants from countries including Iran and Pakistan, was to vote for him and his centrist party in elections this October. But he has been criticised for trying to ape the anti-migrant messaging of Law and Justice. The opposition leader, a Europhile, mentioned the recent riots in France in his diatribe. "Is it still Donald Tusk or maybe Donald Trump?", said Maciej Kinieczny, a Left-wing MP, who called Tusk's video speech "madness". Brexit-supporting Tory backbenchers accused their former nemesis of being a hypocrite. Mark Francois, chairman of the European Research Group of Brexiteer MPs, said: "Regain Control sounds pretty much like Take Back Control to me." Load-Date: July 6, 2023  End of Document
