   UK would 'pay dearly' for Starmer's Brexit U-turn; LABOUR PARTY CONFERENCE Scottish Express October 9, 2023 Monday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 315 words Byline: Martyn Brown Body   SIR Keir Starmer's desire to reverse Brexit would cost British taxpayers dearly because of EU financial incompetence,Tory MPs have claimed. The warning comes after a report by the bloc's financial watchdog revealed billions of euros in European Union funds are being increasingly misspent. The European Court of Auditors (ECA) said errors in cash paid from the EU Budget had "increased significantly" last year. Sir Keir provoked some outrage last month after he was filmed saying he did not want to diverge from EU rules. Monstrous In what Tories described as a "monstrous" plan to reverse Brexit, Labour's leader indicated he would align with Brussels if he won the next election. Sir Keir told a centre-left conference in Montreal that UK relations with the EU could be much stronger if both took the same path. Days later, he held a meeting with the anti-Brexit president of France Emmanuel Macron. Tory backbencher Jonathan Gullis last night said: "This report goes to show how Brexit has already saved taxpayers billions of pounds by being outside of the EU. "Keir Starmer wants to reverse Brexit, he has made that blatantly clear with his cosy chat with Emmanuel Macron, which would cost British people in the long run." Auditors at the ECA found money from Brussels being misspent in the bloc itself and in foreign countries. The EU laid out £169billion in 2022, 4.2 per cent of which was spent inappropriately. For the fourth year in a row, the auditors found the level of error was "material and pervasive". Frank Furedi, executive director of the MCC Brussels think tank, said: "If auditors wrote such a damning report about a business, its chief executive and directors would be expected to resign." Meanwhile, a protester stormed the stage at the conference yesterday, but was led away ahead of Angela Rayner's speech. He did little to put the deputy leader off, who was given a standing ovation. Graphic    Eurofriendly: Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer and deputy leader Angela Rayner Load-Date: October 9, 2023  End of Document
