   unfinished business."': Brexit is far from done i-news August 28, 2023 First Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 8 Length: 855 words Byline: Arj Singh ; Chloe Chaplain Body   Rishi Sunak's Brexit deal on Northern Ireland was signed six months ago and is seen as his biggest concrete achievement in office, resolving the final major sticking point in the UK's messy divorce from the EU. But despite Boris Johnson's election promise to "get Brexit done", the cornerstone of a manifesto that the current Prime Minister - an enthusiastic Brexiteer - campaigned on in 2019 and has embraced as leader, there remain several outstanding issues that could have wide-reaching effects for Britain and its people. IMPORT CHECKS The Government is expected to confirm imminently that the introduction of border checks on animal and plant products coming from the EU will be delayed, again. The UK was planning to roll out the first stage of its new border model from October, with physical checks and other requirements to be introduced throughout next year. But it will be pushed back again over concerns the extra bureaucracy would raise food prices for consumers and fuel inflation. Trade and policy adviser Sam Lowe said the latest delay meant it was possible the UK was breaking World Trade Organisation rules on offering preferable treatments to one trading partner over another. "Obviously the longer the temporary measures drag on for the more likely someone brings a challenge," he said. The Government believes that it is in line with WTO obligations, with insiders insisting that all obligations were considered when implementing the delay. POLITICAL DEADLOCK IN NORTHERN IRELAND As well as resolving the post- Brexit status of Northern Ireland, it was also hoped that Mr Sunak's Windsor Framework could end the impasse that has left the province's political institutions paralysed after they were boycotted by the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP). Despite securing significant concessions designed to appease the DUP, such as the so-called "Stormont veto", the party has refused to re-enter power-sharing. FISHING A deal on EU fishers' access to UK waters expires on 30 June 2026, after which quotas will be negotiated on an annual basis. EU BORDER CONTROL MEASURES Talks continue between the UK, France and EU about how to avoid waits of up to 10 hours for Dover ferry and Channel tunnel passengers next year when Brussels introduces new border control measures for countries outside the bloc. Last month, Eurotunnel's operator Getlink warned the time required for passengers to hand over facial scans, fingerprints and biographical data under the new EU entry/exit system could lead to wait times doubling or even quadrupling. Meanwhile, the Port of Dover is concerned about the prospect of freight traffic being snarled up in delays due to the subsequent possible queues. The system is expected to involve travellers from non-EU countries such as the UK having their fingerprints scanned and a photograph taken to register them on a database the first time they enter a member state. HORIZON The UK is still negotiating with the EU on whether to rejoin the bloc's Horizon research and innovation scheme. Ministers are said to be holding out for lower budget contributions to the programme. But experts warned on Friday that the delay had damaged the UK's reputation in life sciences and that the country faces a brain drain, with scientists "finding it much harder to bring the brightest and best into their labs". BREXITEER GRUMBLING Despite leaving the EU in a "hard" Brexit under a trade deal signed by Boris Johnson that was endorsed by the most hardline Tory Eurosceptics, with the "Spartan" Mark Francois saying it was time to "lower our spears", many in the party's European Research Group (ERG) remain somewhat disgruntled. An ERG source said the group's MPs still wanted to see ministers take advantage of the UK's freedom to regulate, including by repealing more EU law. They also want more done to detach the UK from EU energy dependence, to avoid rejoining Horizon and set up a UK fund, are unhappy about the Windsor Framework and want to see a good deal for fisheries. An ERG source told i: "It is glass half full. "We have left the EU and free of 'ever closer union' we can make our own decisions and laws again. "Some departments have taken advantage of this to strike new trade deals, to reform financial services and set new competitive regulatory environments to drive growth." The source added: "However, there is work still to be done. There are those still arguing to entangle ourselves into aligning with EU priorities, be it on Horizon, fishing, energy and above all Northern Ireland where we have left one of the UK's constituent nations in the EU's single market at a great economic and democratic cost. This remains unfinished business." PRICE OF CARS British drivers will have to pay more for electric cars if ministers fail in a bid to stop tariffs being imposed on the vehicles under the Brexit trade deal. The Government is relying on splits within the EU to secure an agreement that would avoid the new tariffs leading to an increase in showroom prices. ENERGY Provisions in the Brexit trade deal for energy co-operation expire on 30 June 2026 unless a new agreement is reached to update or roll over. Load-Date: August 28, 2023  End of Document
