   United Ireland referendum needs super-majority, says North Minister; Baker cites lessons from Brexit in address to British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly The Irish Times October 24, 2023 Tuesday  Copyright 2023 The Irish Times All Rights Reserved Section: IRELAND; Pg. 2 Length: 488 words Byline: MARK HENNESSY Body   MARK HENNESSY  A united Ireland referendum should require the support of a super-majority of voters in the North and the Republic, Northern Ireland Minister Steve Baker has recommended, citing lessons from the UK s Brexit referendum. A leading figure in the 2016 pro-Brexit campaign and one who pushed for the hardest form of EU exit afterwards, Mr Baker said he regretted now that a 60 per cent vote to leave the EU had not been required. Raising the need for a super-majority vote in a united Ireland referendum set against his own Brexit experiences, Mr Baker said:  Would anyone here seriously want a 50 per cent plus-one united Ireland result in Northern Ireland? I speak personally,  he told the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly.  I deliberately say it like that because some of you I know would [want a 50+1 result]. But just reflect on the trouble we had from running a 50 per cent plus-one referendum in the United Kingdom,  he told the gathering, during the first of a two-day meeting at the K Club in Co Kildare.  Inconceivable   The Brexit referendum would not have passed with a super-majority and, consequently, the UK would not have left the EU, he believed. However, a super-majority victory would have meant that it would have been accepted by everyone.  One regret is it probably should have been a super-majority. That s a huge thing for me to say because if it had been a super-majority, we d have lost and we d still be in.  If we d had to have 60 per cent, everybody would have abided by the result.  It s inconceivable if it had been a 60-40 result that we would have had all of the political difficulty which followed from members of parliament, in particular, refusing to accept the result,  said Mr Baker, accepting that the UK had not  properly prepared  for some of the consequences of Brexit. Saying that he was speaking in a personal capacity, the Minister added he believed that then Conservative party leader David Cameron had never wanted to hold a referendum on the UK s European Union membership.  I personally believe that the Conservative party leadership [in 2015] intended to bargain away the EU referendum in coalition with the Liberal Democrats. I have reason to think that they were devastated when we weren t in coalition. Not least because it meant they had to hold the referendum,  he said. Consequently, Mr Cameron held  the referendum absolutely as quickly as possible in the hope that Remain would just quickly win and it would be out of the way , but that had consequences because we  couldn t be properly prepared  for the effects on the island of Ireland, he said. SDLP leader Colum Eastwood said a super-majority requirement was impossible  because unionist votes cannot be worth more than anyone else s .   If a simple majority is the requirement to remain in the UK, then a simple majority is what will be needed to unite our island. There ll be no changing the goalposts now,  he said.  Load-Date: October 23, 2023  End of Document
