   Warning as Germany seeks new UK trade deal Scottish Mail on Sunday October 15, 2023 Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2023 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 23 Length: 381 words Byline: Anna Mikhailova Body   RISHI Sunak was warned last night not to give ground on Brexit after the German finance minister invited him to improve the UK's trade deal with Brussels. Christian Lindner declared: 'If you want to intensify your trade relationship with the EU - call us.' Government insiders said Germany's willingness to forge closer links proved that 'Brexit naysayers were completely wrong'. But Brexiteer Tory MPs claimed the offer would have too many strings attached. Former Cabinet member Simon Clarke asked: 'At what price? We know there is no closer deal to be agreed without customs unions and single market membership, both of which would make Brexit pointless.' David Jones, deputy chairman of the European Research Group of Tory MPs, said: 'I'm sure German companies would love to do more business with the UK.' But he also warned that the German minister 'shouldn't hold his breath'. A Government source told the Mail on Sunday: 'We won't be calling them. We have the TCA [Brexit trade agreement] and we're not amending, changing or renegotiating it.' By contrast, Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has said he will seek 'a much better' relationship with the EU if he wins the next election. Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves told the Labour conference last week: 'Just because we accept Brexit, it doesn't mean we think we can't get a better deal.' Mr Clarke said: 'Labour's desire for a closer deal is either empty words or a Trojan horse to overturn our vote for independence.' In a BBC interview, Mr Lindner stated that the UK had a 'standing invitation' on future talks aimed at reducing trade barriers. He went to say: 'In the daily life of German corporates, there are new obstacles since Brexit... I don't think the United Kingdom is benefiting from Brexit.' Lord Frost, former chief Brexit negotiator, said: 'It would be much better if our European friends and partners concentrated on putting their own ramshackle Eurozone in order rather than constantly telling us how we should govern ourselves.' A Government source said: 'Since leaving the EU, we have seized the benefits of Brexit to sign trade deals with 71 nations and scrap red tape to help boost investment and growth across the UK. Of course we're happy to talk trade with Germany - as ever, the Brexit naysayers were completely wrong.' Graphic    UNDERMINING BREXIT: German finance minister Christian Lindner Load-Date: October 15, 2023  End of Document
