   We are still waiting to reap the rewards of Brexit, and this is why The Times (London) June 26, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 35 Length: 991 words Byline: Mark Littlewood Body   "Seven years on from the Brexit referendum, more and more of us who voted Leave are being asked whether we regret our choice at the time or ? more commonly ? what we think the point of the whole exercise has been. It is certainly true that the period since June 2016 is unlikely to be looked upon as a golden era in British political and economic history. For some who voted to exit the European Union, there is definitely buyer's remorse. One recent opinion poll suggested that more than one in ten Leave voters regretted their decision; another poll put that figure as high as 20 per cent. This cohort appear to be experiencing the seven-year itch in reverse ? after a lengthy period of divorce, they apparently now yearn for remarriage. Any fair analysis of how Brexit is going needs to try to package up the various different factors that have led to our current malaise. It's not enough to point at a flatlining, debt-riddled, heavily taxed and over-regulated Britain and declare: "You see, we should never have left the European Union." It is eminently possible that a good range of our afflictions would be the same or worse if we had held on to our EU membership card. That said, I think we can break down why there has been no unambiguous Brexit dividend in our economic statistics since referendum day and need to ask whether this is because of the Leave vote itself or the behaviour of the British political authorities since then. Of course, we spent the first half of the past seven years wrangling over whether to carry out the referendum result at all. Forget the rights and wrongs of whether to remain a member of the EU bloc, any country that turns in on itself and spends years engaged in constitutional introspection is unlikely to be providing an optimal climate for investment and growth. The fact that we held three general elections in barely four years from 2015 to 2019, each with a different incumbent prime minister seeking re-election, speaks to the political turmoil into which Britain plunged itself. A significant enough slice of the Remain side were not minded to reconcile themselves to the referendum outcome such that the 2016 vote had to be refought, not through a re-run referendum but through general elections. Theresa May's failure to secure a working majority in 2017 meant further paralysis until Boris Johnson was finally able to find a means of dissolving parliament and winning a substantial mandate a little over two years later. In short, the amount of bandwidth chewed up on the Brexit question in the three years after the referendum can reasonably be assumed to have cost Britain dearly. A swift and decisive move to either get on with Brexit ? or to agree to cancel it ? would have had the benefit of clarity. Instead, we got a morass of constitutional confusion. Once Brexit finally happened in February 2020, there is then the question of what we do within our new status. So traumatic had been the post-referendum wranglings that all sides started to treat Brexit more as an event than a process. The Conservatives' campaign slogan to "Get Brexit Done" in 2019 was aimed at least as much at voters who simply had got bored with the entire constitutional psychodrama as it was at enthusiastic Leavers. Unfortunately, that has limited the scope of those who want to actually do something constructive within the new Brexit landscape. An analogy would be that you make a finely balanced and rather difficult decision to sell your house. Much as your present lodgings have some meaningful benefits, you just don't think they are quite fit for your purposes any longer. After years of complex and detailed wrangling, you finally manage to secure a sale. However, you haven't paid any real attention to what new home you'd like to buy. Therefore you spend the next few years wandering the streets ruminating on whether you really made the right decision about selling up and largely clueless about what you'll do next. This, more or less, is what we have done so far with our Brexit freedoms. A meaningful strategy of determining where to diverge from the EU on regulation has effectively been shelved, with only a few hundred tiny strips of red tape now scheduled for the scrapheap. Jeremy Hunt's planned Edinburgh reforms for the financial services sector already seem to have run into the sand, in large part because we have discovered that although the Brussels bureaucracy was leaden, inefficient and obstinate, the Whitehall machine seems remarkably similar. For all the failure imaginatively to capitalise on what Brexit Britain could look like, there are a couple of areas that provide some succour that we made the right decision seven years ago. The first is our accession to the inelegantly named Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans- Pacific Partnership. This trade bloc accounts for about the same proportion of world GDP as the EU. The official economic modelling puts the potential boost to the British economy at rather minimal levels, but such models have a track record of woefully understating the gains from trade. Combined with a raft of bilateral trade agreements, this at least indicates an appetite to pivot to a more global economic strategy. Second, even if we have shown a lack of guile in tackling the inherited stock of European regulation, our departure from the EU at least means we are not subject to its continuing flow. We are not on the hook for the (EURO)2trillion Covid recovery fund. The EU's moves to harmonise rules in exciting growth sectors such as AI and gene editing also provide the opportunity for Britain to secure a competitive advantage. We have swerved over 7,000 new EU rules since January 2021. But these are fairly thin pickings. I still don't think that Brexit was the wrong decision, but it's frustrating to see how little we have done with it. Mark Littlewood is director-general of the Institute of Economic Affairs. Twitter: @MarkJLittlewood Graphic    Feelings still run high over the decision to quit the European Union Load-Date: June 26, 2023  End of Document
