   We must have been living in cloud cuckoo land to trust the politicians; Seven years ago the Conservative Party led Scotland into a Brexit referendum that ultimately dragged us out of Europe against our will. This week we look at the catastrophic impact on our industries and services, starting today with the broken promises sold to Scottish fishermen Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 19, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 4,5 Length: 1446 words Byline: DAN VEVERS Body   FUMING Scots fishermen who once backed Brexit have said they were promised a "new dawn" before being "sold down the river". Veterans and industry chiefs told the Daily Record how their sector had been treated as the "poster boy" for Brexit then "sacrificed" in the trade deal Boris Johnson agreed with the EU. Speaking at Peterhead Harbour, skipper Peter Bruce said the reality of leaving Europe had shattered his trust in Brexiteer politicians. He said: "It's been a big disappointment, to be quite honest. "The politicians came up from London, Boris Johnson came up a couple of times, the highest levels of government came up to Peterhead Harbour, promising this new dawn for the fishing industry. And that new dawn hasn't come." Fishing was a key plank of the 2016 campaign, with slogans claiming Britain would "take back control of our waters" and enjoy "seas of opportunity". It led many fishermen, particularly small-boat fishers, to back Leave, with many detesting the EU's system of quotas in its Common Fisheries Policy. The terms of the agreement ex-PM Johnson struck with Brussels, however, did not transform the UK into the promised "independent coastal state". Instead, significant EU access to British waters will remain until at least 2026, when the UK and Brussels will begin to negotiate fishing stocks yearly. Peter, semi-retired skipper of the Budding Rose, said: "We were sold down the river from when we entered the CFP in Europe and we feel very, very let down again with the deal we've got. "We must have been living in cloud cuckoo land in some ways if we expected to trust the politicians. But we take people at their word." The Budding Rose takes most of its catch to Peterhead Fish Market, which runs five days a week and remains the biggest whitefish market in Europe, with commercial buyers purchasing their wares at its famous auction. Peter said: "We saw it as a great opportunity to reinvigorate the industry and it hasn't happened. In my mind, we've left the CFP in name only. STRUGGLES Fishermen Peterhead "The pelagic guys, the mackerel guys, they've gained a bit of quota. But for my type of operation, which is whitefish, fishing cod and haddock, we've gained very, very little." Just over the road, workers at McConnell Seafoods - which fillets fish to order from the market - have a similar outlook. Supervisor Stephen Napier said: "We went into Brexit with our eyes closed. And I think we were sold out." The bureaucracy caused by Brexit, such as complicated paperwork and the loss of EU labour, has also been a huge headache. Stephen said: "We send fish to England, London and to Belfast, and that's where we hit the problems with Brexit because you've got to fill out special stickers and manifests for them. They were pulling a lot of manifests for Belfast. It was tricky to start with." Mike Park, chief of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association, said trade barriers have also affected those out on the boats. He said: "Year one after the deal was struck was a big negative for us because, while we were in the Europe club, if another member state didn't catch their allocation of cod, we had a mechanism whereby we could bring it in, we could catch it. "When we came out, that mechanism disappeared - and it took us at least another year to create that so we can get access again, although it's now more cumbersome." Park's views on the top Tories during the Brexit negotiations are derisory. He said: "One of the biggest negatives for me was the hyperbole spoken by the Michael Goves, the David Frosts, the Boris Johnsons, who all knew what was going on and they were still spinning it and spinning it. "And they're still spinning it because, here we are, they're still talking about how post-2026, they will www.deliver.No, you won't. Go and read the Trade and Cooperation Agreement. Europe still gets the same amount of fish after 2026." He dismissed UK Government efforts to tout a new deal with the EU, bringing £280million worth of opportunities to British fishermen this year, as "spin". Park said: "It was in fish we didn't catch. Dover sole was one of the big ones. What are we going to do with that? It wasn't about fishing and who gets what, it was about, 'Guys, we need to make this a significant financial figure. What can we throw in that doesn't impact the EU?" Donna Fordyce, chief executive of industry body Seafood Scotland, said labour shortages have had a "huge impact" on processing. Previously nearly 80 per cent of the workforce came from eastern Europe. She said: "Businesses are having production issues and turning down growth opportunities due to lack of labour." Some in the industry think, post-2026, things will improve. Park said: "I get it from some of my members on WhatsApp, saying, 'Yeah but after 2026 it will be different.' But I'm saying, 'Guys, I'm going to tell you honestly, 2026 will make very little difference to your life.'" QA & What impact has Brexit had on Scotland's fishing industry? Why did didn't want Why did fishermen want Brexit? Leaving the European Union was largely backed by fishermen in the industry because they hated the restrictions of Europe's Common Fisheries Policy. It was widely perceived that Brussels regulators favoured continental fishers and gave British crews a raw deal with quotas. Pro-Brexit campaigners said an independent UK would be able t"take back control of its waters. What did the Brexit trade deal say about fishing? Rather than full fishing rights and the hundreds of thousands of tons of extra catch for UK fishers promised by ex-prime minister Boris Johnson, the agreement largely preserved European fishermen's access to Britain's exclusive economic zone until at least 2026. After that, the plan is for the UK to agree its fishing stocks annually with the EU, as Norway does. Why did fishermen feel so let down by the deal? It reneged on several key promises made to the industry by Brexiteer politicians. such as Johnson, who claimed leaving the EU would enable the UK to become an "independent coastal state". and would bring "seas of opportunity". to the trade. Any gains from the deal in terms of quota are generally considered marginal. What have been the positive impacts of the deal for the industry? Some stocks have seen a bigger rise in quota since the deal was struck, such as Scots catching pelagic fish like mackerel, herring and whiting. Overall, it's estimated the agreement has resulted in a net increase in catch for UK fishermen of 107,000 tons annually - but critics say these gains aren't felt by most fishers as they're skewed towards a handful of species. What have been the negative impacts? Industry bosses say that while most fishermen have felt little to no benefit from quota shares in the new deal, the loss of so-called "quotaswapping", due to leaving the CFP, has been devastating. It's a system where British boats traded quotas they industry? didn't want with other countries' stock to make up any deficits. What other effects has Brexit had on fishing? New customs arrangements after Brexit were chaotic and damaging for fishing fleets, hampering exports to the EU - with a mind-melting 70 pages' worth of red tape guidance published by the UK Government. It also affected trade with Belfast, which changed its customs arrangements with the rest of the UK under the controversial Northern Ireland Protocol. Did Brexit turn Peterhead into a ghost town? Images surfaced shortly after the Brexit trade deal was struck showing Peterhead's usually bustling commercial fish market looking almost completely empty, the cavernous space dealing with just a few hundred boxes of fish rather than the usual 10,000. The famous auction - Europe's largest whitefish market - has since returned to life but some insiders fear it may never reach the heights it once did. What has Brexit meant for the fish processing sector? As well as the headache of extra paperwork, the processing side of the industry has been battered by the loss of labour." from the EU, chiefly from eastern Europe. In the north-east, the proportion of eastern Europe.an workers was estimated to be 78 per cent, and as high as 92 per cent in some processing plants. Why has the price of small North Sea whitefish sunk so low? The demand for and price of small whitefish common to the North Sea plummeted due to a lack of filleters - with firms instead buying larger whitefish which are quicker and easier to handle from countries such as the Faroe Islands. At one point, the price of small haddock fell to 10p a kilo. As a result, Scots fishermen left 15,000 tons of small haddock in the sea in 2022. AN UNMITIGATED DISASTER PAGE 6 TOMORROW How Brexit deprived NHS of life-saving medicines Graphic    BROKEN PROMISES JohnsonSTRUGGLES Fishermen at Peterhead the gained type whitefish,LET DOWN Stephen Napier, main. Top, Mike Park and, Peter Bruce say promised 'new dawn' has not arrived. Pics: Tony Nicoletti Load-Date: June 19, 2023  End of Document
