   We'll all suffer while Brexit remains taboo; Leaving the EU hit our economy and worse lies ahead politicians should start discussing it The Times (London) July 31, 2023 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 20 Length: 942 words Byline: Edward Lucas Body   Brexit was spawned by delusions. And seven years on, unreality still reigns. The Leave camp's arguments have splintered. Some argue that the gains will become apparent only after decades, or that leaving the EU was never about prosperity, but the priceless question of sovereignty. Others blame the Conservatives, the legal system, the civil service or even the British people. A diehard one in five Leave voters have convinced themselves that the economic effects are positive, according to a recent opinion poll for YouGov. The same poll shows that two thirds of us think Brexit has damaged the economy. That is a note of realism: cutting ties with our biggest neighbouring economy has cost 2 to 3 per cent of national income, and brought a 10 per cent cut in investment, according to a recent paper by the economist Jonathan Portes. An even bigger, unquantifiable, cost is to our international image and influence. A narrow majority, 51 per cent, now supports rejoining the EU. But that is unrealistic too. What we had in 2016 is gone for ever. Future membership would come only after lengthy, hardslog negotiations. Decision-makers in Brussels would agree to it only if they could be sure that we had changed our minds for good. For now, we are digging the hole deeper. Optimism that followed the better-than-expected negotiations over Northern Ireland is evaporating. The government was quick to slap down a tentative offer from Brussels of regular summits. Japan and Turkey find this "strategic dialogue"framework useful. But not us. The "small boats" bill, which in EU eyes breaches international law, will make relations more difficult. Rishi Sunak, bean-counting hard, is hesitating to sign off on a deal that brings Britain back into Horizon, a research co-operation framework that was one of Brexit's most grievous casualties. Our scientists are frantic with impatience about that. Even promised changes to end the miserable difficulties imposed on school trips from the EU are bogged down in the Home Office. The bare-bones Brexit deal also ignored our cultural sector ? where we are still a global superpower ? leaving our music industry crippled by customs and visa requirements. The number of bands touring the EU this summer is down by a third against pre-Covid levels. Even the flinty Lord Frost, our former Brexit negotiator, concedes: "We should take another look." But a campaign spearheaded by Sir Elton John to remedy this huge act of national self-harm meets muffled silence. "No one is taking responsibility for this absolute mess," says Gill Morris of the Carry on Touring campaign. Political will is "sorely lacking" says the Association of British Orchestras. And Brexit is not yet complete. Grace periods on issues ranging from finance to fisheries via data, electric vehicles and energy expire in the coming two years. After that, trade and investment will be hit further. As EU rules evolve, the cost for British firms of keeping up is growing. From October this year, for example, EU companies must start reporting on the carbon emissions attached to some imported goods. That hits British exporters. New regulations will also apply to plastic waste management. From January next year any British firm offering online services to EUbased customers will have to charge VAT. It is not enough to comply with these rules: as a non-EU country, we must now prove we have done so. As a member state, this was taken on trust. Our own government is digging hard. From October we will crack down on food imports, starting with mandatory health certification for medium and high-risk products such as meat and some dairy. The new Border Target Operating Model should ease life for big business by reducing checks and paperwork. But for those importing small quantities, the costs will be higher. This could spell the "death of the deli", according to The Grocer magazine. This growing disaster should be a hot topic for the opposition parties. If rejoining is out for now, better relations are clearly possible. Post- Ukraine, Britain's military clout gives us a big bargaining chip with defenceless Europeans. But here the problem is pragmatism, not unreality. Labour has an eye on the red wall seats it lost to the Conservatives in 2019. In the Daily Express in May, Sir Keir Starmer appealed to avid Brexit supporters, flatly ruling out returning to the single market or customs union. Privately, Labour insiders say that Europe is a secondterm issue. Charles Grant from the Centre for European Reform, a think tank, disagrees, saying that delay will compound the economic damage. His report on what Labour should say on Europe comes out in September. That month's Lib Dem conference will also bring a push within my own, fervently pro-European party, by activists frustrated by the leadership's near-silence on the Brexit calamity. A strong message on that would highlight the government's failings and perhaps force Labour to speak up too. But again, the electoral geography argues otherwise. Rebuilding ties with Europe is a winner in some seats (such as the central London constituency where I am a parliamentary candidate) but not in the Lib Dems' former strongholds, notably the southwest. The huge victories in Somerton & Frome, last month, and in two previous by-elections, came by emphasising a locally focused anti-government message, with no mention of the B-word. The same approach should help in the contest that is expected in Mid Bedfordshire. Brexit may have failed. But the Brexit supporters' grip on our politics remains. Who will have the courage to break it? This growing disaster should be a hot topic for opposition parties Load-Date: October 27, 2023  End of Document
