   What is Starmer’s real plan for the EU? thetimes.co.uk March 9, 2024 Saturday 5:25 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 1603 words Byline: Tim Shipman, Chief Political Commentator Highlight: New deals with Brussels and a rumoured return for May’s Brexit negotiator — Labour is starting to show glimpses of how it might work with the near neighbours Body   When Sir Oliver Robbins began contacting old colleagues in the Cabinet Office two or three months ago, it seemed the former chief Brexit negotiator was bored of banking and looking for a way back into Whitehall amid suggestions that Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, might not return from sick leave. Case is now back in harness but officials say Robbins is continuing to “sniff around” his old department. Senior civil servants and several sources around Sir Keir Starmer say Robbins is the first choice of Sue Gray, Labour’s chief of staff, to take on the top role in the civil service. The possibility of a return for the man who negotiated Theresa May’s 2019 deal with Brussels, ultimately rejected by MPs, would put Brexit back on the agenda and raise questions about how a Labour government would approach relations with the European Union. “Sue and Olly were always very close,” a civil servant said. “She wants him, it seems.” A senior figure in government said: “Robbins was sniffing around on three things: the first was the cabinet secretary job and what Simon was going to do after the election. The second was whether there was any interest in having a permanent secretary in No 10.” This was a job Case did before he became cabinet secretary, but which was abolished after  Boris Johnson  left power.  “The third thing was whether he could help the current administration. He seemed to think it would be easier to get the top job if he was already in the door. It would neuter a little bit of the criticism if it was a Conservative administration that gave him a job.” Speculation about Robbins’s future and Labour’s intentions around the existing Brexit deal, the Trade and Commerce Agreement (TCA) signed in December 2020, comes as Labour is shopping around for ideas on how to boost growth and find more money for public services. In the budget last week, Jeremy Hunt, the chancellor,  announced that he was scrapping non-dom tax status , which raises £2 billion — money Labour has already pledged elsewhere and which it will need to find to plug a black hole in its economic plans. Sources close to Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, say she will announce a new source of money, but “in our own time”. Officials in the Cabinet Office and the Foreign Office have been quietly working for several months to draw up plans for a Labour government, trying to divine what the party is planning and advise how that fits with existing work. The civil service has prepared transition documents on the state of relations with the EU — and where other opportunities might lie — for Labour as part of preparation for government talks with officials. One official said: “We basically take the ‘day one’ documents you give to a new secretary of state after a reshuffle and massively dumb them down, because a lot of Labour people are not up to speed on the detail yet.”  A recent lunch between the EU ambassador in London and some Labour people left the Commission team perplexed. “They didn’t seem to know what they were saying,” an EU source told a Whitehall contact. The civil service also has a record of everything Labour frontbenchers have said on the issue in an attempt to discern what the priorities would be for an incoming government. Senior figures in Labour say the party will have two priorities regarding relations with the EU. The first is to sign a veterinary agreement with Brussels. The Tories will try to depict that to voters as evidence that Starmer is happy to accept alignment with EU rules in a wider range of areas. The Confederation of British Industry says a veterinary agreement would lower costs by removing the need for border checks on food and drink, which are blamed for raising costs and slowing supply chains.  A senior Labour figure said a Starmer government would be keen to move “very fast” on that issue. “The big thing we want on trade is a veterinary and food agreement,” they said. “You don’t need to reopen the TCA to do that. You can actually negotiate one of those over and above it. Quite simply, it will put food and drink on the tables of hard-pressed families around the country more cheaply. It’s simple, pragmatic politics.”  The second thing Labour has already publicly pushed for is a security and defence deal with the EU. This is one of the EU’s top priorities and has been pushed in recent conversations between member state ambassadors in London and both Labour and Tory officials.  However, Tories regard a new EU security structure as a distraction from bolstering Nato, where few EU countries pay the benchmark of 2 per cent of their GDP into their own defence budgets. The second big “ask” for the EU side will be progress on a series of “mobility” agreements, which would allow for young people, or those employed in particular sectors, to work or study abroad more easily. The Commission was keen to get such deals when Boris Johnson negotiated the TCA in 2020 but the British government rejected anything that looked like the return of freedom of movement.  Labour figures have expressed an interest in “bilateral youth mobility” schemes with EU member states, but EU ambassadors have made clear to them that any deal would have to be with the EU as a whole. With net migration of more than 700,000 a year, this would be a hugely problematic area for Labour. Starmer has already got into hot water by suggesting, last September, that he might be prepared to accept the  “quid pro quo” of a migrant returns deal with the EU , something the Tories say will raise net migration by 100,000 a year. Starmer then ruled out such a deal. Lessons seem to have been learned.  A senior Labour source said: “The three red lines, freedom of movement, customs union, single market, they’re not shifting. Labour has been burned too many times on this issue. The mobility stuff is extraordinarily hard for a Labour government, when immigration is so high. We are working hard to build a new electoral coalition. There’s no interest in that.” As the election approaches and the battle for votes in the Leave-backing red wall intensifies, the Tories have signalled that they plan to make an issue of Labour’s shuffle towards Brussels, warning Brexiteers that Starmer might water down  Brexit . The party has a dossier on Labour’s public statements on the issue. This will draw attention to Starmer’s stated intention to use a review of the TCA in 2025 to get “a much better deal for the UK”. On a trip to Canada in September, Starmer said “we don’t want to diverge” from EU rules, but then said this was just for food and environmental standards. The Tories also seized on an interview the Labour leader did with LBC last May when he admitted he was “looking at” whether EU citizens should be able to vote in the UK. The Tories have studied the plans of Labour frontbenchers like Hilary Benn, who co-authored a report last year entitled “Trading our way to prosperity” and called it a “handy checklist” for what Labour could do in government. It called for a “general policy of regulatory alignment with EU standards and regulations”, a “new mobility chapter” in the TCA, and even floated the idea of Britain paying into the EU budget. These suggestions are not Labour policy but highlight the tension between what some would like to do and what they can plan for now. Greg Hands, a trade minister, is publicly warning that Labour would seek to join a customs union with the EU. A senior Labour source dismissed this as “total garbage”. A third area where Labour sees potential benefit is in doing a deal to share data on criminals, which would give British law enforcement and intelligence agencies real-time access to Europol’s information on smuggling gangs, terrorists and international fraudsters. Starmer  made a trip to Europol  earlier this year. Britain’s intelligence expertise means there would be mutual benefit for the EU. Some in government suggest Labour may not need a big bang in relations. The truth is that, under the radar, Whitehall officials have already been quietly working with the EU to iron out some of the practical problems with the TCA ever since Johnson left No 10 and relations became de-dramatised. One of these, allowing for the passage of creative artists — such as rock bands on tour — between Britain and the EU has already been done (with the exception of one country) with little fanfare or controversy. Civil servants suggest a veterinary deal might also follow, whether or not Labour wins the election. Some officials think the bigger problem is that the UK lacks a strategy for EU relations and would get more leverage if the next government does more to diverge. “There are a few civil servants scattered about Whitehall tracking new EU law coming through, but no one is really thinking strategically,” one said. “Do we want to align with these rules, to drop standards, or even to go quicker in some areas?”  The argument is that if Britain gets an advantage on issues such as electric vehicles, the EU would feel compelled to copy UK rules, rather than the other way around. “For us to get anywhere, the EU needs to see us as someone they need, not want, to do business with.”  Some officials and many senior Tories believe Starmer’s team is naive about how easy it will be to get more. “They seem to think that if they breeze into Brussels and announce that they are not wicked Tories, the EU will fall over themselves to help on boats and trade. They’re in for a rude shock.” A Labour spokeswoman confirmed that Sir Oliver Robbins “does know Sue [Gray] and they have been in touch”. However, she added: “There has been no job offer and there isn’t a plan.” Load-Date: March 9, 2024  End of Document
