   Whipped-up fear finally put to rest after 24 years The Journal (Newcastle, UK) November 30, 2023 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 19 Length: 695 words Byline: Jonathan Arnott Body   THERE'S a phrase in the game of poker: "pot-committed". A player who has bet too much early in the hand finds it's impossible to back out. They've put so much in already that they continue to bet, realising they'll be in serious trouble if they fail to win. That bet is often an objective mistake, but a player feels committed to continuing the action. Recent events have reminded me of a 24-year propaganda campaign, which I think might finally be over. It started in 1999, and - on and off - has continued ever since. I like to think that we weren't being gaslit, that those responsible genuinely believed what they were saying. Does that seem strange to you, the notion that politicians on opposing sides might truly believe what they're saying even if it turns out to be wrong? I'm talking, of course, about Nissan. Our politicians insisted that Nissan would leave the UK if we didn't give up the pound and join the euro. The accusation was repeated multiple times over the years. It took on a sort of folksy belief in certain quarters: the reaction to even the mildest Euroscepticism came to be "but Nissan will leave". They never did, of course, and continued to expand. By 2013, I was browbeaten by Labour and Lib Dem politicians insisting that I had some kind of callous disregard towards jobs at Nissan. The accusations repeated, year in and year out. They were brought up during the Brexit referendum campaign over and over again. The idea was pushed throughout negotiations. They became so adamant that "Nissan would leave" that it became a mantra. Such notions are dangerous: repeat them often enough and they risk becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy. Last week, the whipped-up fear was finally put to rest. It transpires that Nissan are going to build the electric Juke and Qashqai in Sunderland as part of a £3bn investment. There will be some state subsidy, yes, but comparable to that expected in the EU. The propaganda campaign was quite unpleasant: a constant accusation that anyone who disagreed had callous disregard for people's lives. Those who voted for Brexit are often angry. Does anyone really think that the shambolic resignation of David Cameron, then Theresa May, and finally the bull-in-a-china-shop approach of Boris Johnson, was the right way to approach negotiations - or that the UK got a 'good deal' from the EU? In debate at the Durham Union Society just before the referendum, both pro- and anti-Brexit sides were asked the biggest weakness of their case. The anti-Brexit side obfuscated; I explained my biggest fear was that government incompetence would spoil the potential of Brexit. Since then we've had Prime Minister after Prime Minister. We've had backbench rebellions, constant Cabinet reshuffles and haphazard policy announcements. We've had a global pandemic and worldwide economic slowdown. Some is circumstance; the rest, incompetence. The government was hapless in negotiations with the EU. We've overpaid in the "divorce bill", accepted lopsided arrangements, and tied the UK into too much EU law. Meanwhile, the government has failed to properly sift through the mountain of remaining EU legislation to work out what to keep. New trade deals have proceeded at a snail's pace. As a Brexiteer, I'll be frank. I feel let down by a government which has done such a poor job of implementing Brexit. Yet at the same time, UK manufacturing has grown. It's not just Nissan: since the Brexit vote in 2016, our manufacturing output has grown faster than France, the United States and Germany. The UK overtook France last week to become the world's eighth-largest manufacturing nation. Brexit could have been a huge success. I feel let down, too, by those who - in every negotiation - sought to take a wrecking ball to the UK's position. We were driven apart by internal fighting, squabbling amongst ourselves whilst the EU portrayed a united front. That's the reason I rarely write about, or even talk about, Brexit any more: only the closure of the 24-year Nissan story prompted me to do so. Politicians on all sides acted so irresponsibly. I no longer have a 'side' - frankly, I haven't a clue who I'll be voting for at the next election. Load-Date: November 30, 2023  End of Document
