   Why do people vote for a "madman" like Milei? Science has an explanation CE Noticias Financieras English November 22, 2023 Wednesday  Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1375 words Body    Political scientists see the Brexit referendum as the beginning of a new era of far-right populism that gave power to, among others, Donald Trump in the USA, Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil and Giorgia Meloni in Italy. The last link in this chain is the victory of Javier Milei in Argentina. In fact, the economist who defines himself as an anarcho-capitalist surprises more than any of the list, not only because of his radical proposals, but also because of his quirky personality. Many still wonder how a candidate who uses a medium to communicate with his deceased dog in 2017 -this is how Juan Luis González tells it in the unauthorized biography El Loco, a title that refers to a nickname he drags from school- has achieved 55.6% of the votes.  Maybe if we go back to Brexit we can find answers. That's what a study just published in the journal Plos One has done, with a striking result: people who voted in 2016 in favor of remaining in the European Union had, on average, higher cognitive abilities. This concept alludes to the mental processes we use in processing information, for example: memory, attention, language management, orientation or reasoning. Does this mean that those in favor of leaving the United Kingdom were less intelligent? Controversy would be served with such a simple and blunt conclusion for such a complex and nuanced issue, but the research is really interesting.  The authors, who are from the School of Management at the University of Bath, in southwest England, explain that higher cognitive ability has previously been associated with a tendency to recognize and reject misinformation. That precedent is key because many studies have shown that British voters received a large volume of false data before going to the polls. Socioeconomic, socioeconomic, sociodemographic and even psychological factors that split the vote have already been studied, but these researchers wondered what about voters' mental abilities.  To find out, they studied data from 3,183 heterosexual couples in the UK that had been collected as part of a large study called Understanding Society. One of the tests that participants undergo analyzes their cognitive ability, as measured by their performance on a series of tasks. Researchers at the University of Bath looked at whether there was any relationship between the results and voting on Brexit and concluded that there is a strong statistical link between higher cognitive ability and having voted to remain in the EU.  In figures, only 40% of those with lower ability voted to remain, compared to 73% of those with higher abilities. In addition, they found a strong influence of the partner: people whose spouse had higher cognitive ability were also more likely to have voted against leaving the UK. However, when the choice of the two did not coincide, having higher mental abilities than the person they cohabited with was associated with an even greater likelihood of voting to remain in the EU.  How could such statistically clear results be explained? The authors believe that misinformation about the referendum may have complicated decision making for people with low cognitive ability. These voters would be "more susceptible to misinformation and disinformation," they say. In general, those with lower analytical thinking skills "find it more difficult to detect and discard this type of information."  Parallels with Argentina  The question is whether these results on the Brexit referendum can be extrapolated to other electoral processes, including the recent Argentine elections. "In any country there will be specific circumstances that could affect controversial votes," comments Chris Dawson, lead author of the study, in statements to El Confidencial. For example, "in the Argentine elections the state of the economy was an important factor," he acknowledges. In any case, in the absence of a specific study of the particular case, if there are sectors involved "responsible for circulating more amounts of misinformation," he explains, "then this could, as in our analysis, affect the decision-making of those with low cognitive capacity."  As in many other electoral processes in recent years, hoaxes and disinformation have been very present in Argentina's presidential election, as denounced by many of the country's media and verification portals. For example, both in the first round and in last Sunday's final election, false information was widely disseminated about the foreign vote when it had not yet been counted, about possible electoral frauds related to ballots and alleged messages from candidates that had never been issued. Personal attacks have been constant throughout the process: while a medical history attributed Milei to suffer from schizophrenia, a fake video accused Peronist Sergio Massa of receiving a bag of cocaine.  "As we observed in our study, low cognitive ability is also related to more antagonistic messages", develops the researcher from the University of Bath, "and to a lower trust in experts that may be relevant for the Argentine vote". Some of the new president's star proposals, such as dollarizing the economy, have been criticized by specialists for the great complexity of their implementation or the consequences they may have, but these analyses do not seem to have made a dent in Milei's followers.  The "vulnerability" of the voter  Therefore, Chris Dawson sees parallels between his study on Brexit, the Argentine elections and other votes, but believes that this line of research should be further expanded, especially with respect to important referendums, whether in the past, present or future. "We hope that people will take note of the results of our research," he says. "The media has always spread misleading information, but the rise of social networks and the internet has dramatically increased the scale and accessibility of misinformation and increasingly polarizing messages," comments the expert.  Although he recognizes that in recent times measures are already being taken by social networks and the media, "when political action is based on misinformation and the inability of those with lesser skills to detect and discard it, the democratic process is undermined". This is where the key idea of his work comes in, which is "individual vulnerability to misinformation". In that sense, after closely following the debate prior to the Brexit referendum, "it seemed clear to us that much information provided to the public was contradictory, false and often fraudulent", but we had to find out whether the cognitive ability of voters could be a relevant factor for those messages to take hold.  However, the University of Bath researcher is aware that there may be a strong temptation to misinterpret his results. If those who voted against Brexit have higher cognitive abilities, does this mean that their choice is more intelligent? Dawson rejects that conclusion altogether, because it involves conflating different concepts and drawing conclusions beyond what the data allow. "Our results say very little about what differences in cognitive ability may or may not exist between two random voters," he comments, so Britons who voted to remain in the EU have no reason to "brag" about it. In fact, among those in favor of Brexit there is also a segment with higher than average skills. "What our results do imply is that misinformation about the referendum might have complicated decision making, especially for people with low cognitive ability," he clarifies.  Political scientists place in the Brexit referendum the beginning of a new era of far-right populism that gave power to, among others, Donald Trump in the US, Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil and Giorgia Meloni in Italy. The last link in this chain is the victory of Javier Milei in Argentina. In fact, the economist who defines himself as an anarcho-capitalist surprises more than any of the list, not only because of his radical proposals, but also because of his quirky personality. Many still wonder how a candidate who uses a medium to communicate with his deceased dog in 2017 -this is how Juan Luis González tells it in the unauthorized biography El Loco, a title that refers to a nickname he drags from school- has achieved 55.6% of the votes.  Load-Date: November 23, 2023  End of Document
