   Why was the DUP boycotting Stormont - and what happens now? Irish Independent January 31, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 649 words Byline: JAMES CRISP Body   Jeffrey Donaldson has announced the DUP will end its two-year boycott of Stormont over post-Brexit trading arrangements. Here is everything you need to know about the Irish Sea border, Brexit, a row that has paralysed Northern Ireland and what happens next. What has happened? The DUP has overcome internal divisions to back an offer from the UK government over the Irish Sea border. This should bring an end to the DUP's boycott of the Northern Ireland Assembly, which has lasted almost two years, and return a devolved government to the region. What is the Irish Sea border? The Border between Northern Ireland and the Republic became invisible as border infrastructure was removed after the Good Friday Agreement 25 years ago. Brexit risked the return of checks because the UK left the EU, while Ireland remained a member state. The DUP campaigned for Leave but most people in Northern Ireland voted Remain. The UK and EU agreed to prevent a hard land border after Brexit. Northern Ireland continued to follow hundreds of EU rules - - and was subject to the European Court of Justice in some matters - - as part of a deal that gives it unique dual access to the UK and EU markets. The Northern Ireland Protocol introduced checks in the Irish Sea on British goods and animals entering the North to ensure they met EU standards, in case they crossed into the Republic. It came into force on January 1, 2021. That sounds controversial It was. The UK government threatened to tear up the protocol because it was damaging trade with Northern Ireland. That threat pushed the UK and EU to the brink of a trade war. The DUP walked out of power-sharing in Stormont in protest against the post-Brexit trading arrangements, which it argued put Northern Ireland's place in the UK at risk, in February 2022. In February 2023, British prime minister Rishi Sunak agreed the Windsor Framework with the EU, which reduced the number of checks and introduced a less stringent "green lane" for goods that were meant to stay in Northern Ireland. However, the Windsor Framework was not good enough for the DUP. Mr Donaldson, entered negotiations to end the Stormont boycott, which resulted in yesterday's announcement. What's in the deal? The full detail has not yet been made public. However, it involves a £3.3bn ((EURO)3.86bn) finance package for Stormont, and Westminster legislation to guarantee Northern Ireland's place in the UK. It also includes a new east-west council to bolster intra-UK trade ties. The UK government offered to rebrand the "green lane" as the "UK internal market lane" and to screen any new laws so they do not create barriers to trade. But the Irish Sea border remains in place, as well its checks, and the deal is not a renegotiation of the Windsor Framework with Brussels. What does the EU say about all this? The European Commission said it was not party to the negotiations but was pleased that a devolved government could be restored. It added that it expected the UK to uphold the Windsor Framework deal. Has the lack of devolved government hurt Northern Ireland? It certainly prevented necessary action on NHS waiting lists, the longest in the UK, and the cost-of-living crisis. In January, the North endured its biggest public sector strike in 50 years, which could have been avoided if the Assembly was sitting. The financial package includes money to settle the pay claim. The boycott has also damaged trust in politicians, who are regularly accused of drawing salaries without doing any work. What happens next? The deal should be published today and the legislation passed in Westminster tomorrow. The Northern Ireland Assembly could be recalled on Friday or Saturday to elect a new speaker. Sinn Féin is entitled to nominate the First Minister and that will be Michelle O'Neill. The DUP will nominate a Deputy First Minister but has not said who that will be. (© Telegraph Media Group Ltd 2024) Load-Date: January 31, 2024  End of Document
