   'BREXIT was about immigration ...its voters now feel left down'; UNITED CO-OWNER CLAIMS FAILURES WILL PROMPT CHANGE The Express May 20, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 628 words Byline: Steph Spyro Body   BILLIONAIRE Brexiteer Sir Jim Ratcliffe says supporters like him have been let down since Britain quit the EU. The boss of petrochemicals giant INEOS blasted immigration and economic failures following our departure in January 2020. Manchester United co-owner Sir Jim said Brexit "didn't turn out how people anticipated". He added: "Brexit was largely about immigration - that was the biggest component of that vote. "People were getting fed up of the influx of [the size of] - the city of Southampton coming in every year, I think last year it was two times Southampton. "A small island like the UK can't cope with vast numbers of people coming in - it just overburdens the National Health Service, the traffic service, the police. "The country was designed for 55 or 60 million people and we've got 70 million people, and all the services break down as a consequence." Net migration hit a record 745,000 in 2022. It it is estimated to have fallen to 672,000 in the year to June 2023 but the Government's 2019 manifesto commitment, made when net migration was around 219,000, was for overall numbers to come down. Sir Jim said: "That's what Brexit was all about and nobody has implemented that, they just keep talking about it but nothing has been done. "Which is why I think we'll finish up with a change of Government." The energy giant boss, who is based in tax haven Monaco, spent last Sunday with Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer at Manchester United - the club he runs as minority owner. The entrepreneur, 71, said: "I'm sure Keir will do a very good job at running the country - I have no questions about that." Pressed on whether his company would donate to Labour, Sir Jim said: "We're apolitical at INEOS, we just want a successful manufacturing sector in the UK.We'll talk to either Government about that." Sir Jim, who was raised on a council estate near Manchester, is now worth £23.5billion and was named Britain's fourth wealthiest person on yesterday's Sunday Times Rich List. He said: "I think most of the country feels it's probably time for a change, and I sort of get that, really." Defence Secretary Grant Shapps dismissed his criticism by insisting the Conservatives were not doomed to defeat. Critical He pointed to PM Theresa May losing her majority at the 2017 general election - despite polls giving her a 20-point lead during the campaign. Asked about Sir Jim's views, Mr Shapps said "He's wrong. One of his complaints was on immigration, not recognising that a large amount of the immigration last year came from, for example, Ukrainians coming here. And I had a family live with me.They were very welcome in this country. "So there were very good reasons why this country being generous has done those sorts of things." According to Ipsos's latest monthly "issues index", immigration is only the fourth most important issue for Britons. In its survey of 1,035 adults, the most important issue is the economy (34%) followed by the NHS (29%) and inflation (27%). Immigration was mentioned by 24% of respondents. Just 3% mentioned Brexit or Europe, which Ipsos said was the "lowest level of concern" recorded since September 2012. It said: "The economy and public services are likely to remain at the forefront of voters' minds. "This suggests they will be critical factors as we approach the election. Worry "The NHS was important in 2019 as well. But in other ways the next election is shaping up to be quite different. Despite recent falls, inflation is still a bigger public worry than five years ago, especially for young people, while immigration is a concern for Conservatives and older people. "But Brexit, which was one of the defining factors in Boris Johnson's victory in 2019, is now at its lowest point on the public's agenda for over 10 years." OPINION: PAGE 12 Graphic    Match day...Starmer and RatcliffeInvestor...Jim Ratcliffe has Manchester United stake Load-Date: May 20, 2024  End of Document
