   'Cliff edge' for electric cars at end of Brexit delay i-news February 24, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 410 words Byline: Joe Duggan Body   Britain's electric car industry faces a "cliff edge" when a delay to Brexit tariffs on vehicles traded between the UK and EU ends, a leading trade expert warned. A review of the post-Brexit trade agreement is not likely to resolve "rules of origin" requirements that have had tariffs postponed until 2027, according to William Bain, head of trade policy at the British Chambers of Commerce. i has been told the EU is set to offer Labour a reset of post-Brexit relations if Sir Keir Starmer wins the next general election, with 2026 earmarked for a review of the Trade and Co-operation Agreement (TCA). A 10 per cent tariff will hit electric vehicles moving between the UK and the EU once the extension of the TCA grace period expires in 2027, adding thousands to the cost of a car. Batteries are the most expensive component of electric vehicles, with manufacturing dominated by China. The UK and the EU used the TCA to try to boost the creation of a European electric car battery industry and rely less on Chinese imports. But manufacturers are still reliant on Chinese supplies, as EU and British supply chains for EVs are not yet advanced enough for electric cars to meet the rules. "Unless there's a huge change in the pattern of where UK and EU car manufacturers are sourcing the batteries from, or the components or critical minerals within EVs, we could be facing another cliff edge for January 2027," Mr Bain said. The TCA provides for tariff-free trade between the UK and EU, but only applies to goods produced in Britain and the bloc. Brexit 'Turmoil again' A Labour government would plunge the UK back into "arguments about Brexit all over again", Kemi Badenoch has said. The Trade and Co-operation Agreement, signed by Boris Johnson in 2020, will be reviewed in two years' time. EU sources claimed it could leave the door open for more ambitious negotiations between the UK and the bloc if Labour takes power. While Labour has insisted it will "make Brexit work", the move has stoked backlash from Brexiteers who claimed it will drag the UK back into disagreements with Brussels. Ms Badenoch, the Business Secretary, said Parliament has "spent three years deciding the right Brexit strategy". Greg Hands, the trade minister, said he had "long predicted that Labour will seek to enter into a customs union - or similar arrangement - with the EU, if they ever come into power". "After all, this was Sir Keir Starmer's own policy before the 2019 election," he said. Load-Date: February 24, 2024  End of Document
