   'Mortgages set to stay high': what election will mean for our money i-news July 1, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: SPORT; Pg. 8 Length: 1085 words Byline: Grace Gausden Body   Mortgages will remain high in the future but that could help firsttime buyers, Paul Johnson, the director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), has said. Interest rates are likely to fall this year but will remain much higher than they have for most of the past 16 years and this is likely to keep house prices in check, he said as he answered i readers' questions about what the election means for them. He also suggested that raising council tax for people living in the most expensive properties could be an effective way to raise money to fund public services. Mr Johnson, head of one of the UK's leading economics research institutes, has been vocal throughout the election campaign, examining what the parties' manifestos really mean for voters. He has cast particular doubt on any new government's spending plans, warning that they would be dependent on economic growth. Here Mr Johnson answers the readers' questions. Do any of the parties have a sensible offer for the future funding of social care? Paul Wheeler The straightforward answer is no. Nobody has got anything to say about putting more money into the social care system. Many people need social care and it's taking up more and more of local authorities' budgets. It's one reason why some authorities have gone bust. I've not heard any party say there's more money available. Then there's the second issue, which is about whether people who have assets or income should pay for social care at all. The proposition from the current Government was that if you have spent up to £86,000 on personal care over your lifetime, the state would pick up the rest of the costs. My understanding is that the two bigger parties are still committed to achieving that. What would be the best way to alter or replace council tax to make it fairer but also to raise more money for local government? Helene Grygar Council tax is definitely one tax that needs changing. We're in the absurd situation where the amount of tax you pay is based on what your house or flat was worth in 1991. The Government should revalue homes. However, this is favourable to people in London and the south and unfavourable for people in the North and the Midlands as property values are a lot higher in the south. The other obstacle is that the system is essentially regressive, so the more valuable your house, the lower the fraction of the value you pay in council tax. Put all that together and you'll find that Buckingham Palace has less council tax on it than many three-bed properties in Blackpool. If you wanted to raise more money for local government, I think you would increase the amount that you're asking people in more expensive properties to pay. Labour suggests it would fund its pledges through economic growth and chasing down tax dodgers, both of which seem vague at best. If their plans failed, would this mean a massive addition to our huge national debt pile? Michael McErlean I don't really know what a Labour government would do if growth doesn't rise. The issue is that unless we get considerably more growth than we're expecting with taxes at the present level, there is basically going to be no more money for most public services. At worst, it means further cuts to some public services. However, the amount of money you can get from clamping down on tax avoidance is fairly small. Ultimately, my answer is - and I think this is my beef with all the manifestos - that we don't know whether this would add to our national debt pile. Is the cost of Brexit standing at £150bn? Assuming we had stayed in the EU would this cost have been avoided and cleared the UK's public sector financial black hole? Tim White There have clearly been costs to leaving but the question is whether some of those are actually just created by the political chaos that we have had. I think that even if we stayed in the EU, the difference might have been less than people expect. That said, we've clearly made trade with our biggest, nearest and richest trading partner more expensive. The trade intensity of the UK economy has dropped in a way that it hasn't in other economies. How much effect has this had on the size of the economy? Well, the Office for Budget Responsibility thinks that in the long run our economy might be about 4 per cent smaller as a result of Brexit, roughly £125bn. Whether we've lost that amount already is uncertain. So, yes, we would be somewhat better off had Brexit never occurred. I don't know by how much though. What will happen to interest rates? How long will it take for the property market to rally and sale prices to improve after the election, if at all? BM Shaughnessy I think we could expect interest rates to start falling after the election, but I'd be very surprised if they fall anywhere near back to where they were in the 2010s. This means mortgage rates won't go down to where they were over the last period, when rates were as low as 1 per cent, which probably means that house prices are not going to grow much at all. Mortgages are going to be more expensive than they were. £ The amount is forecast the UK it is not much has been But I think there are some real upsides to this. More than a decade of zero-interest rates was very damaging to the British economy and to the distribution of assets between older and younger generations. In a strange kind of way, higher interest rates might help younger people get on the housing ladder. If house prices don't go up or even come down, that makes it a bit easier to scrape that deposit together. Given the recent answers from Labour concerning taxation, placing a reliance on growth, how realistic is the achievement of its objectives in a period of five years? Brian Blackshaw Labour's manifesto is interesting in the sense that it hasn't got very much at all in terms of specific spending commitments. There's no money committed, for example, to reducing child poverty but there is a clear ambition to reduce it. The manifesto has lots of strategies, for example to get rid of waiting lists - but that's really hard to achieve unless you're going to spend a lot of additional money. 125bn Brexit to cost ECONOMY; clear how already lost They have been careful not to be precise about exactly what they want to achieve. You get the sense that they want to deal with big issues but haven't given very precise numerical targets. They haven't allocated any cash to achieving those things. has for of £125bn The amount Brexit is forecast to cost the UK economy; it is not clear how much has already been lost about Load-Date: July 1, 2024  End of Document
