   'Will I be leader of the opposition within five years? It's possible now'; nIGEL FARAGE ISN'T INTERESTED IN THE CULTURE WARS - HIS FOCUS IS FIRMLY ON REPLACING THE tORIES WITH rEFORM IN PARLIAMENT, HE TELLS Andrew Billen The Times (London) June 8, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 28,29 Length: 1659 words Byline: Andrew Billen Body   F rank Sinatra, Michael Crick tweeted this week, had almost as many comebacks as Nigel Farage. The political analyst had calculated that Farage's surprise decision to once more lead Reform UK (the political wildcard formerly known as the Brexit Party) was the fifth time he had reassumed a party leadership from which he had previously walked away. The better-known statistic is that Farage's consequent last-minute candidacy in Clacton, Essex, is the 60-year-old's eighth attempt to become an MP. In contrast, this is Rishi Sunak's fourth election and his first as prime minister. It is not going well. Farage is speaking to me between Sunak's apology for bunking off early from the D-Day commemorations in Normandy (which Farage attended privately, having raised money for a London taxi charity that took 24 veterans to Normandy) and yesterday's BBC1 election debate. On a scale of one to ten, I ask him, how grave was the PM's "mistake"? "It's a ten and I'll tell you why. Because you can say, 'I made a mistake' but you either understand where this country is, how it feels about D-Day and especially how it feels about those last remnants, or you don't," he replies. "He has no sense of our history, or feeling genuinely for the culture that is out there among ordinary people. He's utterly disconnected in every way." Because he is the son of Hindu immigrants? I ask, fearing I hear a right-wing dog whistle. "No, no, no. Forty per cent of the total contribution into world wars came from what we now call the Commonwealth." So why is he out of touch? "Class. His job," says the private schooleducated former commodity trader of the private school-educated ex-hedge fund manager. "When's the last time Sunak went out and had a drink with a working-class person?" Farage is a pub man. He does connect. Surely the failure of those seven previous campaigns must have galled him? He calls that nonsense. Farage made only one "serious" attempt and that was in 2015, in South Thanet, and the Tories cheated. "They cheated so badly one of the Conservative Party agents got a ninemonth [suspended] prison sentence. Did you know that?" We meet at a Westminster pub that turns out to be less an alehouse than a restaurant. Equally off brand, he sips not beer but a gin and tonic, although he blusters that his press minder ordered it. Preparation for the TV debate will involve a scan of the statistics he intends to deploy and a glass of red wine. So here we are, from the beaches of Dunkirk to the shores of Essex and the start of this fresh battle in Farage's never-ending war. Conspiracy theorists have doubted his insistence he made the decision to stand in Clacton after a morning's fishing and a ruminative pint in a pub but he says it is all true. So what did he catch? "A couple of pollock." He also talked to his partner, the French politico Laure Ferrari. "It is not an easy thing for the family!" To be Nigel Farage's partner, or son, or daughter? "No." Nor is it easy, perhaps, to be Farage himself. He refuses to pose for a photograph outside because his security team is still in France. It is nothing to do with this week's milkshake attack. "It's been like this for years," he says. In 2019 the Brexit Party's plan was to ensure Boris Johnson's Tories were in power to see Brexit through. The plan this time is more ambitious: to realign the British political right so the Conservatives are either replaced by Reform or end up being run by Farage. The parliamentary arithmetic makes a reverse takeover look implausible. How would it work? "You can never say, because every circumstance is different. The one blueprint we have is Canada, obviously, from '93," he says referring to its Conservative party's wipeout and eventual merger with former opponent parties. "Reform was always a six-year plan." To replace the Conservatives as the main opposition party? "That's the plan. Of course, things never quite work out the way you want them to. I think Labour in government will have zero honeymoon. They inherit a huge set of problems that can't be dealt with without radical change and I don't see an ounce of radicalism in [Sir Keir] Starmer." Could we end up with a new party, the Reform Conservatives? "You can speculate on that. All I know is the journey on which we're embarked, which I've now decided to throw myself into." Were he a betting man ("Of course I am") would he bet that within five years he is leading the main opposition in parliament? "It's possible. It never was before, but it's possible now." So has he been talking to dissident anti-Sunak Tory MPs who might join forces with him after the election? (I happen to know he has several times, and recently.) "Some of them but I'm not that bothered, really. The most poisonous thing that ever happened to Ukip was getting lots of former Tory MPs to join the party and bringing with them their way of doing politics, which is constant warfare and back-stabbing." L ike Clacton's previous Ukip MP, the Tory defector Douglas Carswell? "I don't just mean him. I think we had 30 former Tory MPs join and collectively, as a group, it didn't bring us a lot of good. If people want to come to us that's fantastic, but it's not something I've been begging for. All I say to them - there's some quite high-profile names there - is, 'Look, we're on the same side. At some point we're going to be in the same party. I just don't know what it's called.' " He told voters this week to send him to parliament to be "a bloody nuisance". Is there an anarchistic streak in him? "Oh yes, of course. You don't smash down barriers by coming out with a tray of cucumber sandwiches. If you want to disrupt you have to be disruptive. And I think we need to disrupt because nothing works any more. What works? Does the NHS work? Does it hell. Do any of our public services work? Does work even pay?" Is there more to his politics than disruption? When I ask if he has read Edmund Burke, the 18th-century philosopher beloved of conservatives, Farage replies testily that of course he has. He does not seem to have heard of the right's new favourite thinker, Yoram Hazony - but then nor had I until the day before we meet. "I'm very instinctive. I believe in country. I believe the nation state is the fundamental building block to which we owe some form of allegiance. It's why everything to do with globalism for over 30 years was wrong." But there is a difference between instinct and prejudice. I presume he could not really have meant last year to blame being stuck in traffic on the M4 on immigration? "Have you driven down the M4 lately? Have you driven anywhere lately? Now, listen to me, please. The population has risen by ten million. Ten million! And 85 per cent of it is directly down to Conservative and Labour immigration policies." I am about to tackle his attitude to Muslims, 46 per cent of whom he told Sky News two weeks ago supported Hamas in Gaza, when he says: "Why do we have 18 to 24-year-old Britishborn Muslims, a quarter of them nearly being attracted to jihad?" Where's that figure from? "A JL Partners poll. Don't question it. Good Morning Britain had to apologise to me the next day when they did." Is he serious about fighting the culture wars, or is it a distraction from the big problems such as government debt? "I'll tell you what, I don't delve too deeply or heavily into this stuff. You know, the trans debate is not stuff I spend much time talking about." The other day he said a woman can't have a penis. "That's right. That's obvious. Everyone else at Westminster knows that. Did I say it? Yes. But is it a central part of [my politics]? No. Look, to be honest with you, my life is pretty settled, pretty comfortable, probably the best it's ever been. So I'm chucking it all away to go back in. Why? Because there's a big gap in the market, a very big gap. The opportunity to provide a proper voice of opposition to a Labour government, but also to start to build over the next five years the positive arguments about entrepreneurship, small business; about the fact we're living in an over-regulated environment. Brexit was never completed properly." Ah, Brexit. Did he really make money on referendum night by placing currency bets against sterling after announcing Remain had "edged" it? "No! You know what, when 27 years of your life [campaigning against the EU] comes to an end, you're powerless, you're helpless. It's over. That was the one time I did sink into quite a black mood." He thought he had lost? "Yes, even though people around me were saying, 'No, no, it's looking good'. I got myself in an odd place." But by 8am he was celebrating with a pint? "No, four o'clock."No one can know whether the dawn of July 5 will make an MP of this eternal political warrior, forever in tactical retreat or on the advance. This time, the mood on the battlefield somehow feels different. Nigel Paul Farage Curriculum vitae Born April 3, 1964, Kent, to Barbara and Guy Farage, a stockbroker; married twice; four children School Dulwich College Career Commodities broker from 1982 to 2004; founder member of Ukip, 1993; member of European parliament, 1999-2020; helped lead 2016 Brexit campaign Quick fire Baby Reindeer or Bugs Bunny? I watched Baby Reindeer. I hated it but I couldn't stop watching. I watched it all in one go Kemi Badenoch or Suella Braverman? Suella Braverman, right. Goodness me, no contest Angela Rayner or Rachel Reeves? At least Angela Rayner's got real personality BBC or ITV on election night? Got to be GB News Premier Inn, Clacton, or the Grand Hotel, Brussels? The Premier Inn, Clacton, is friendlier. It's the customers. In Brussels, I was banned from pubs, restaurants and coffee shops. That's how bad it got Real ale with Sir Keir Starmer or lemonade with Rishi Sunak? The real ale with Starmer. He's dull and uninteresting but over a quiet drink he might be slightly different Crossfit or crossword? The Times crossword. It's devilishly hard. But it's good Graphic    Nigel Farage said of the prime minister's decision to leave D-Day commemorations: "He has no sense of our history or feeling for the culture among ordinary people"TIMES PHOTOGRAPHER JACK HILL Load-Date: June 8, 2024  End of Document
