   10 New Year's Resolutions to finally Get Brexit Done; With tonight's original deadline to scrap all EU-era law, an impassioned plea by a former Brexit Minister Mail on Sunday (London) December 31, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 23 Length: 1100 words Byline: DAVID JONES Body   ALMOST four years on from the UK's formal departure from the EU, there is no shortage of talk of Brexit freedoms.But those freedoms are of limited value if not accompanied by a genuine and firm resolve to capitalise fully on the enormous potential now open to Britain as a free and sovereign nation. The fact is that, almost eight years on from that epoch-making Leave vote, we should now re- commit to the fulfilment of the British people's judgment. And dare I say, in what will almost certainly be a General Election year, we Conservatives must focus on creating a clear, principled dividing line between ourselves and a Labour party which, never let it be forgotten, is led by a man who bitterly opposed Brexit and then demanded a second referendum to try to reverse the people's vote. To that end, I propose ten New Year Brexit Resolutions - ten ways of helping to deliver what the British people decisively asked for. 1 Most importantly, we need to recognise that our Parliament is now sovereign again. For the first time in half a century, we have complete freedom to make our own laws in whatever way we want. We must remind ourselves - and I include Tory Ministers in this - that we no longer need to kowtow to Brussels. We must seize the opportunities that legislative independence presents to build the world's most competitive economy. 2 Crucially, we must use that sovereignty to take back control of our own borders. Of all the reasons that people voted to quit the EU's grasp, the ability to decide who should come to this country was, for many, the most important. Within weeks, the Government will reveal further details of precisely how it intends to resolve the cross-Channel small boats crisis and execute its plan to send illegal migrants to Rwanda. So I urge the Prime Minister to reflect on the mandate he has from the Brexit vote to use our Parliamentary sovereignty to disapply, as appropriate, any obsolete international arrangement that denies us control over our own national borders. Vitally, that includes, if necessary, reassessing the European Convention on Human Rights - a charter which made sense 70 years ago in the aftermath of World War Two, but is now cynically exploited by people-smugglers to advance their disgraceful trade. 3 We should take even greater advantage of our ability, post- Brexit, to run our own foreign and trade policy. We can strike new international agreements designed to benefit British people, rather than being obliged to take into account the needs of other EU countries whose priorities are very different from our own. Pleasingly, progress in this area has been made and the Trade Bill, which will confirm Britain's membership of the £12trillion Trans- Pacific Partnership, is well on the way to becoming law. It is disappointing that hoped-for deals with India and the US are yet to materialise, but Ministers should redouble efforts to secure trade agreements with those important partners, knowing that they have been made possible by Brexit and could not have happened had this country remained yoked to the EU. 4 We must complete the clearout of all the estimated 4,000 EU-era laws that remain on our statute book. It is to the regret of many of us that only about 600 Brussels-derived regulations and reels of red tape will have been culled by tonight's original - but since amended - deadline when it had been agreed that finally EU laws 'would be sunset, enabling the UK to create regulations tailor-made for its people'. It is imperative that the review process set up by the Retained EU Law Act should be accelerated, to purge our legal system of Brusselsderived law as quickly as possible. In that context, we should capitalise on the benefits of the Common Law, the most elegant, sophisticated and flexible legal system in the world, shared with the US and most of the Commonwealth. 5 The Commonwealth, with its deeply established ties of friendship, is another priceless asset we must use. Those ties, and the commonality that comes with the English language, can be a springboard to forge even closer, mutually beneficial relationships with our natural allies and trading partners. 6 Our liberation from EU control offers greater scope to transform our tax system to encourage economic growth. We should, in particular, set a highly-competitive Corporation Tax rate to attract inward investment. We are free to raise VAT thresholds to encourage entrepreneurship. And we should scrap our ridiculous and pernicious tourism tax. Currently, overseas visitors pay 20 per cent VAT on goods purchased here, but if they buy them in EU countries, they are entitled to claim the tax back. This is a deeply damaging tax and the exact opposite of what Brexit should mean. 7 All of us should take pride in Britain as a highly-innovative country with a long history of excellence in research. Three of the world's top ten universities are British (Oxford, Cambridge and Imperial College, London) - none are in the EU. Now free and independent, the Government must liberate that natural inventiveness by creating a much more nimble approach to regulation, so different from the EU's stultifying 'precautionary principle' which focuses on the risks of a new product or service rather than its benefits. 8 Britain must harness its Brexit freedoms by pressing on with setting the world's highest animal welfare standards. We are right to stop live exports, which we couldn't do as an EU member. But we should go further, for example outlawing pig farrowing crates and inhumane methods of poultry-rearing. 9 Brexit must mean Brexit in every part of the country. It is deeply distressing that, as a consequence of the Northern Ireland Protocol and the more recently agreed Windsor Framework, an integral part of our country is becoming progressively detached from the rest by being obliged to follow EU standards for goods. This must end as a matter of priority. 10 My last Brexit resolutions concerns our traditions: the national characteristics that make us what we are. If people want to buy or sell goods in pounds and ounces, they should be allowed to do so. After all, we buy beer in pints and measure speed in miles per hour - as indeed does the US. Welcome as it is that the pint bottle of champagne so beloved of Winston Churchill is to return, the Government should go the whole hog and allow people the freedom to use imperial measures if they wish. So, let's make 2024 the year of Brexit delivery. And in an Election year, reap the rewards of the millions who voted for it. ? David Jones is Tory MP for Clwyd West and deputy chairman of the party's European Research Group. Graphic    FREEDOM: Millions voted in 2016 for the benefits that Brexit could bring - now the Government must deliver them Load-Date: December 31, 2023  End of Document
