   @iYour View i-news June 20, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: FEATURES; Pg. 20 Length: 816 words Body   Need to invent an enemy Those of us old enough to remember the Second World War know how the existence of a common enemy unites all sections of society. To unite their peoples behind them, despite treating them so abhorrently, Vladimir Putin and Kim Jong-un have hit on the clever idea, not having a genuine common enemy, of inventing one. As Hilaire Belloc put it: "Always keep a-hold of Nurse, for fear of finding something worse." PETER MARTIN CODICOTE, HERTS PM undermined by own minister I am surprised to hear of Jeremy Hunt blaming Rishi Sunak for problems in the NHS, ("Stalin would be proud of the number of our targets in the NHS", i, 19 June). I was under the impression that it was Jeremy who set out to dismantle the NHS when he was health secretary. He did that in a very underhand way, and I assume he is doing a similar thing now in order to replace Rishi. ROSIE JARRETT HYSON GREEN, NOTTINGHAM Tories broke UK, not Farage The article by Emily Maitlis blames Nigel Farage for breaking Britain ("Britain is broken and Farage broke It", My View, June 19). The Conservative party are the group responsible for this failure. The Establishment didn't want Brexit and put in place prime ministers who voted against Brexit. You cannot expect someone who voted against Brexit to make a good job of the Brexit talks. The Conservative politicians failed the UK on Brexit implementation and deserve to be wiped out. ALAN CRAIGON VIA EMAIL Right to recall tragic event Alan Davis is right to remind us of the tragedy of HMT Lancastria in 1940 (Your View, 18 June). A converted Cunarder, the troopship was bombed by the Luftwaffe as it lay at anchor in St Nazaire harbour, resulting in horrific loss of life. Churchill ordered a total news embargo, fearful of the devastating effect the disaster could have on the country's morale. My father, one of the soldiers who didn't make it on to the ship before the captain ordered it to sail, witnessed its sinking from the quayside. It was laden to the gunwales, packed with troops on every deck. He was one of the sappers serving in the Territorial Army unit, Kent Fortress Royal Engineers, sent out to France, Belgium and Holland to destroy the oil reserves stored in coastal port refineries, in order to hold up the German advance. XD Operations (the code name for such missions) were top secret and no plans were made for the unit's evacuation, needed well after the Dunkirk evacuation had been completed. Like so many who fought, my father rarely spoke of his experiences, but towards the end of his life he opened up a little and shed tears as he recalled comrades who had died on the Lancastria. There is a very small memorial at the National Memorial Arboretum, but no campaign medal for those involved. DAVID ABLETT SITTINGBOURNE, KENT A great idea that gets my vote I agree that voting should be compulsory (Your View, 19 June). To implement compulsory voting would be difficult. However, to simply add "none of the above" could be done easily. JOHN HARRIS CARLUKE, SOUTH LANARKSHIRE Hypocrisy of animal lovers Being a vegetarian, I read Simon Kelner's article ("Upset by cow ramming? Best not visit the abattoir?", 18 June) with great interest. To claim to be animal-lovers and eat meat with relish is hypocritical. H D SHAH KENTON, MIDDLESEX In the late 70s my wife and I lived next to a slaughterhouse. One night a cow escaped. The police were called but they didn't bother trying to catch it. They just shot it and dragged the carcass back with a tractor. We've been vegetarian since. PETER RAWLINGS GREAT BADDOW, ESSEX The long and the short of it At last someone has spoken about short vs long hair for women ("Do not fear a woman with short hair", Eleanor Margolis, 18 June). It's a shame that so many young women only ever have long hair - what happened to sassy short bobs? I honestly feel most are afraid of cutting their hair because they will look different. They should consider it - different is great fun. DIANA WARD REDRUTH, CORNWALL i was wrong In the News Matrix item "Theresa May to receive life peerage" on 17 June we stated: "She is the third ex-prime minister to become a peer." In fact, five others - David Cameron, Margaret Thatcher, James Callaghan, Harold Wilson and Alec Douglas- Home - have been made peers. We apologise for the error. Our commitment We take very seriously our responsibility to maintain high editorial standards, and are grateful to readers for pointing out any errors. i adheres to the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) code of practice. If you wish to complain about our editorial coverage, especially with relation to inaccuracy or intrusion, please write to The Editor, i, 9 Derry Street, London W8 5HY, or email reader@inews.co.uk You can contact Ipso directly at Gate House, 1 Farringdon Street, London, EC4M 7LG, telephone 0300 123 2220, or by email on inquiries@ipso.co.uk MORE COMMENT on inews.co.uk Load-Date: June 20, 2024  End of Document
