   A new PM would have same hard time with EU, warn diplomats The Sunday Telegraph (London) May 26, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 330 words Byline: James Crisp Body   A LABOUR government will face tough negotiations at the hands of "hardnosed" Brussels when it tries to forge closer post-Brexit ties with the EU, senior diplomats have warned. The UK's last EU commissioner and two former British ambassadors spoke after Sir Keir Starmer vowed to deepen foreign policy cooperation, smooth out trade barriers and improve relations with the EU if he wins the next election. "The commission is an extremely hard-nosed negotiator. And they pride themselves on it," said Lord Darroch, who was British ambassador to the EU and the US during a diplomatic career that spanned 40 years. "The EU has moved on from Brexit. There are plenty of issues around Europe. And what happens next with the Brits really doesn't make the top ten," he said. Sir Julian King, the UK's ambassador to Ireland and France before Lord Cameron appointed him as the last British EU commissioner before Brexit, said: "Labour have to be ready for a really nitty gritty, difficult discussion because just being nice isn't going to cut it." And Sir Ivan Rogers, the former ambassador to the EU and a key civil servant in the early years of the Brexit negotiations before he resigned in 2017 told The Telegraph: "Some in Labour tend greatly to underestimate the diffi- culties it will face. There are some signs of pennies dropping. But just because the global environment is much grimmer than in 2016 does not guarantee changed mindsets in Brussels and in key places in key capitals." The EU and UK have agreed to review the Brexit trade deal in 2026. Labour had said it wanted to renegotiate the trade deal and is understood to have been disappointed when the European Commission swiftly ruled that out. Sir Keir wants a veterinary deal to reduce Irish Sea border checks and is keen to formalise foreign policy and security cooperation, which the EU is understood to be open to. Lord Darroch said Labour 'have to be ready for a really nitty gritty difficult discussion' with Brussels bureaucrats Load-Date: May 26, 2024  End of Document
