   AC Grayling: After Brexit, I'd take two Irish passports if only they'd let me; The philosopher tells Patrick O'Donoghue he despairs over anti-immigration policies and reveals he tried to switch his nationality based on his ex-wife coming from Dun Laoghaire The Sunday Times (London) June 16, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 686 words Body   A C Grayling, the philosopher and author, has told of his admiration for Ireland and his deepening disillusionment with the direction of politics and society in the UK. Speaking to The Sunday Times before his recent appearance at the Belfast Book Festival, where he discussed his new book Who Owns the Moon?, he also described the UK scheme to deport migrants to Rwanda as "an abomination" and revealed that he sought Irish citizenship following the Brexit referendum in 2016. The atheist and humanist author is a staunch critic of Brexit and has called for a second referendum since Britain voted eight years ago to leave the European Union. He argues that the UK should rejoin and that a meaningful democratic mandate for exiting was never secured. "My first wife [Gabrielle Smyth] was born in Dun Laoghaire and I wrote to the Irish embassy and said, 'Could I please have Irish citizenship?' on the basis that my ex-wife had been Irish. And they wrote back and said, 'No.' I was very disappointed," Graying said, recalling his "half-jocular" application of 2017. "If I was offered Irish citizenship, I would take it like an absolute shot." Ireland is one of "the great success stories" of the EU, according to Grayling, who lives in central London. He added: "Of course, Brexit has a great deal to do with it [seeking Irish citizenship], because I would love to have an EU passport. But Ireland, with its wonderful literary tradition and just the beauty of the place, and the good craic - in all those ways, give me two Irish passports." The philosopher said he believed Ireland had been "magnanimous" and dignified for not having "mocked or sneered" at Britain over its course since the referendum. "In the grand scheme of things, Ireland is a big brother now [to the UK], no longer regardable by anybody in the United Kingdom who gives two seconds of thought to the matter as being any kind of poor relation or ignorable. In comparison to how things are here, we should be ashamed of ourselves in the UK. Really there is a marked difference in standing now. I think in the eyes of the world, at any rate, Ireland stands proud and the UK has just covered itself in something agricultural." Asked about the implications of Britain's immigration policy for Ireland's approach, Grayling denounced the UK's scheme to deport migrants to Rwanda for its lack of "basic human kindness". The scheme has been cited as one of the key driving factors pushing asylum seekers to seek refuge in Ireland because they fear deportation from the UK. "The Rwanda scheme is an abomination. It is an absolutely vile thing to be doing. Immigration is a very different matter from asylum seeking. On the asylum front, it is horrifying that a putatively mature, sensible country, which is what the UK kind of used to be ... [is doing this]. It's just unconscionable," he said. Separately, as the UK gears up for a general election on July 4, and in the wake of the local and European elections in Ireland, Grayling reflected on the "toxic" and intolerant atmosphere hanging over the democratic process. "This is a pretty recent phenomenon. It's just the last decade and more that this has happened. I'll make one exception for Nigel Farage, but in general I don't think that people should have milkshakes thrown over them because it would be so much better if there could be a civilised, mature, careful debate about things that matter," Grayling said. The philosopher said the primary source of this political disaffection was a widespread feeling that governments did not act with the public interest in mind. "When you look, for example, at prime minister's questions in Westminster, it's ridiculous. It's just party political insults and so on. Government is not for the real interests of the country. If it were, there would have been no Brexit," he said. "We get people digging themselves into a political position because of political careerism, because political parties speak to their constituencies and not to the general welfare," he added, arguing Britain now needed "real constitutional reform". In the eyes of the world, Ireland stands proud Graphic    AC Grayling was scathing about the toxicity of politics Load-Date: June 16, 2024  End of Document
