   Are we heading for ANOTHER EU referendum? Polling guru Sir John Curtice says Britain could face a fresh showdown by 2040 with Labour's voters 'very anti-Brexit' MailOnline April 25, 2024 Thursday 3:01 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 379 words Byline: James Tapsfield, Political Editor For Mailonline Body   Britain is on track for another referendum on whether to be in the EU, according to a polling guru. Professor Sir John Curtice pointed to the overwhelmingly anti-Brexit views of Labour voters and younger generations as he argued the issue has not been settled. At a think-tank event, the eminent psephologist said he 'would not be surprised' if there was a re-run of the ballot by 2040. The 2016 referendum threatened to rip the country - and the Tories - apart as supporters of Remain and Leave ranged against each other. It culminated with a 52 per cent to 48 per cent victory for Leave, triggering the resignation of David Cameron as PM. But it was not until January 2020, after Boris Johnson replaced Theresa May and won a decisive election victory with a pledge to 'Get Brexit Done', that the UK officially severed ties with the bloc. Keir Starmer is now adamant that he will not seek to rejoin, despite pushing for a second referendum when Jeremy Corbyn was leader. However, speaking at an event organised by the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank, Sir John said he did not believe the 2016 referendum would be any more conclusive than the one held by Harold Wilson in 1975.  Pressed on when another national ballot could happen, he replied: "That depends very much on uncertain politics. I wouldn't be surprised if it happens before 2040.' Sir John added: "If you look so far at what's happened to attitudes, and if you look at the age profile of attitudes towards Brexit, you can see why.  'A lot will also happen about - how does our relationship with the EU evolve, to what extent does the next Labour government soften it or not.  'One of the things to realize is the Labour party is going to get elected by an electorate which is three-quarters anti-Brexit... 'Labour's vote is almost as anti-Brexit as it was back in 2019.' Sir John said many people thought it was 'not unlikely the Labour government is going to hit trouble fairly early on' because it will inherit a 'terrible, terrible legacy'. 'Then they've got to think about ways of how to keep their voters on board,' he said. 'A lot of their voters would be hoping that a Labour government would do something about the EU which is perhaps rather more than the Labour Party is currently saying it wants to do on the EU.' Load-Date: April 25, 2024  End of Document
