   As the Brexit damage persists, a tale of two competing strategies The Times (London) February 14, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 35 Length: 956 words Byline: David Smith Body   In a few months' time it will be eight years since the referendum and the narrow vote, in percentage terms, in favour of Brexit. Famously, there was no plan for Brexit then. The question, after years of political indecision and instability, is whether there is a strategy now. ''I ask because a new assessment by Goldman Sachs, Rishi Sunak's alma mater, is clear on the negative economic impact of Brexit. Its report, The Structural and Cyclical Costs of Brexit, by James Moberley and Sven Jari Stehn, concludes it has given us lower growth and higher inflation. Its estimate of the cumulative hit to growth is 5 per cent of gross domestic product, similar to "doppelganger" assessments performed by the Centre for European Reform that compared the UK's record with similar performers before Brexit. The hit to growth has occurred through three routes, the Goldman economists say. "First, we show that UK goods trade has underperformed other advanced economies by around 15 per cent since the referendum," they conclude. "Second, business investment has been weak since 2016, falling notably short of the prereferendum trend. Third, immigration from the EU has dropped sharply but non-EU immigration has risen significantly, although [recently] skewed towards students with lower participation rates. "Taken together, the evidence points to a significant long-run output cost of Brexit, broadly consistent with the range predicted by prior studies. In terms of the mechanisms, our analysis suggests that the drop in trade has been roughly as expected, the underperformance in investment more pronounced than anticipated but the effect on overall immigration more muted." Most of this was known in advance, as the authors note with their reference to previous studies. Indeed, I was writing as much eight years ago. Next Tuesday marks eight years since then prime minister David Cameron announced the referendum date. It was clear that a vote for Brexit would damage trade and investment, particularly inward investment, although the extent of the Conservatives' descent into chaos remains something of a surprise. The lack of a plan B, where B stands for Brexit, was exceptionally poor government. The buck for that must stop with Cameron, initially at least, who was convinced most voters would never contemplate leaving the EU, but none of the prominent Brexiteers would know a post-exit strategy if it bit them on the leg. Rolling over existing EU trade deals with other countries and negotiating some small ones ourselves was never going to be transformative or replace the loss of single-market membership. I know many readers would love to turn the clock back and pretend the past eight years had never happened, but we haven't yet invented time travel ? and neither of the main political parties is even talking about the possibility of re-entry. What we have, instead, are two distinct strategies, one in its infancy, the other not yet properly attempted. The first, which an earlier PM might have called the "white heat of technology", is particularly associated with Jeremy Hunt since he became chancellor 16 months ago. His aim is to make the UK a technology superpower, replacing the inward investment that came to Britain to access the single market with investment coming because of this country's technological advantages. In a speech last year he said: "If anyone is thinking of starting or investing in an innovation or technology-centred business, I want them to do it in the UK. I want the world's technology entrepreneurs, life science innovators and clean energy companies to come to the UK because it offers the best possible place to make their vision happen." In his autumn statement, he noted we had the third largest tech sector in the world, double those of France and Germany, the biggest life sciences sector in Europe and the largest film and television sector too. The UK is also well placed for the artificial intelligence revolution. The second strategy is to develop closer economic and trade relations with the EU, though falling short of membership. This is what Labour is expected to do, even if Sir Keir Starmer has been coy about it, as on many things. Some EU-watchers say Brussels would be reluctant to reopen the trade and co-operation agreement with the UK, weak and unsatisfactory though it is. They say the EU has moved on. One reason for Britain's poor trade performance is missing out on intra-EU trade, where looking in from the outside has not been a happy experience. However, the EU would welcome a Labour PM, having had to deal over the past eight years with five often troublesome Tories. I am not suggesting, as one former Brexit secretary did repeatedly, that German car manufacturers will come to the rescue, though they could do with some extra output. Yet there is surely scope for something better and Goldman Sachs suggests the "direction of travel" on this will be quantitatively more important than non-EU trade deals. "While we see a number of areas for potential closer co-operation ? including agriculture and, possibly, financial services ? the direction will depend importantly on the next government's plans and priorities." Which strategy will work? Neither is likely to succeed on its own. The technology playing field globally is a crowded one and Britain is competing with other countries with similar ambitions. Similarly, trying to claw back some of the lost benefits of single-market membership can never replace the full-fat version. Combining the two strategies, on the other hand, might help. But we have to be realistic. Once an economy has lost its dynamism, it takes a lot to get it back. David Smith is Economics Editor of The Sunday Times david.smith@sunday-times.co.uk '' Graphic    Despite optimism ahead of the vote, there was never a post-Brexit plan Load-Date: February 14, 2024  End of Document
