   Austerity, Brexit, wars and pandemic: a deadly cocktail CE Noticias Financieras English June 8, 2024 Saturday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1674 words Body   When David Laws took office as the new Treasury Secretary following the victory of David Cameron's coalition government in 2014, he found on his desk a note from his predecessor (Labour's Liam Byrne) with a six-word, one-line message, "Sorry, but there's no money left." It was a joke. Despite the financial crisis that had erupted two years earlier, the UK was coming off a decade-long period of economic growth and had full coffers. When Rachel Reeves becomes Britain's new finance minister on July 5 (only a Lourdes-like miracle or a Titanic-like catastrophe could prevent this), the Treasury Secretary she appoints will not find any little messages on her desk. This time the safe is really empty, and there is little room for jokes. The most optimistic figures put the cost of Brexit at 4% of the country's GDP, but some put it as high as 6%. The official story, the one that Rishi Sunak's government is desperately trying to sell, less than a month before voters pass judgment on fourteen years of Conservative rule, is that the economy has begun to recover and is on the right track: it has technically emerged from recession, growth prospects for this year are a little better than expected, inflation seems to be under control at around 2.3% per annum, and the Bank of England is ready to start lowering rates. But that official narrative is one thing, and what voters perceive after the quadruple whammy of a decade and a half of austerity, Brexit, the pandemic and the supply problems caused by the war in Ukraine is quite another. The consequence is a low-productivity economy with stagnant wages at levels (in real terms) of more than ten years ago and the highest taxes since the end of World War II, which has not yet recovered what was lost during the pandemic (aid cost 400 billion euros), weighed down by instability, declining investment and trade barriers resulting from the exit from the EU, and which according to the OECD will be in 2024 the lowest-growing of the G-7 after Germany. On average, a French or a German has 12,000 euros per year more than a British person. The macroeconomic numbers sung by the Government are all very well, but the British are putting their hands in their pockets and the coins are ringing less than before Brexit came into force and before David Cameron took over from Gordon Brown in Downing Street. A good deal less. In fact, according to the Office for National Statistics, the disposable money of a citizen of this country is on average 12,000 euros per year less per year than that of a Frenchman and a German, and soon Slovenians and Poles will enjoy a higher income. The economic model is based on services, low wages and a high level of immigration. That growth was 0.6% higher than in 2023 in the first quarter, and that the annual outlook is put at 1% or 1.5% instead of the 0.2% originally forecast by the OECD, leaves voters indifferent. So too does the fact that inflation is brushing the 2% target that the Bank of England has set itself for gradually backing off rate hikes. Prices may have stopped rising, but increases of up to 30% in food, petrol, gas and electricity are not going to be reversed, and wages have not risen by nearly that much. Inflation is close to the Bank of England's 2% target, but food and energy have risen by as much as 30% in total. The summary is that the economy has stopped the free fall, but it has a long way to go to get out of the hole it is in, partly because of global inertias (pandemic, wars in Ukraine and the Middle East), and partly because of shooting itself in the foot by pulling out of the world's largest single market, in which it also had a privileged position, and of applying draconian austerity during the years when interest rates were low and states could invest in social services and infrastructure at virtually zero cost. But David Cameron and his Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne decided to be more papist than the Pope and sought to reduce public debt while everyone else was spending. A decade and a half of cuts have ruined public health (there is a queue of eight million people for operations), deteriorated education, collapsed prisons and the justice system (the police have been instructed not to arrest so many people because there is nowhere to put them), reduced life expectancy, created a society more unequal than any in the EU (4.5 million children are officially poor, and three million people go to food banks). When they vote on July 4, Britons are not going to ask themselves whether there is less inflation than last year, or the recession is over, or growth is a little higher, but whether they are better off or worse off than in 2010, when the Tories came to power, and whether they see for themselves and their children a more prosperous future than the present. And the answer to both questions in a resounding no (not with Labour either, which has taken on the fiscal and spending policy of the current Government, and whose hands are going to be tied in investing in infrastructure and the welfare state, unless it reneges on its election promises). Some relevant data Labor absenteeism. A total of 6.3 million British people receive disability benefits (half of them long-term), at a cost of 85,000 million euros per year. Inequality. The number of technically poor children rises to 4.5 million. Poverty. Three million Britons resort to food banks organized by churches and NGOs. Unemployment. The unemployment rate is 4.3%, low compared to other countries, but many are not looking for work. Growth. Increased by 0.6% in the first quarter compared to the same period last year. Demographic pressures, with longevity, the increase in the number of older people relative to younger people, growing welfare and health care needs, and the cost of pensions, create a complicated picture for any government in any country. But even more so for one (like the Labour government that will take the reins next month) that has given up at the outset on imposing a wealth tax on 0.04% of the highest incomes, which would provide 290 billion euros over five years, enough to solve the problem of health and care for the elderly, build hospitals, hire more doctors, nurses and social workers.... But Keir Starmer, the future Prime Minister, has assured that he will not do so, nor will he raise VAT, corporate or income tax for anyone. He will only eliminate the tax privileges enjoyed by private schools and non-domiciled foreigners (non-doms). The United Kingdom is essentially a conservative country, Labour loses many more elections than it wins, and they believe it is because the public does not trust them as stewards of their money. Hence their exaggerated timidity. Low productivity and chronic lack of public and private investment is a structural problem. If Starmer, as he promises, does not raise taxes and maintains the goal of reducing public debt as a percentage of GDP (currently almost 98%), then it will be impossible for him to find the money to fix chronically under-invested public services and reduce inequalities between rich and poor and between the north and south of the country. Counting on economic growth that we do not know where it is going to come from is like the story of the milkmaid's milkmaid. Aside from cyclical issues, the UK economy has enormous potential but fundamental structural problems that are difficult to solve: the lack of productivity of its workers, the quality and quantity of the workforce, the lack of investment in education, research and technology, dependence on immigration (which commands lower wages), inequality, poor governance, deteriorating infrastructure, the difficulties banks place on lending, deindustrialization, dependence on services at the expense of manufacturing, chronic deficits both fiscal and current account, monopolies and lack of competition in many sectors, job insecurity, precarious work... Since the arrival of the Tories, public spending as a percentage of GDP has fallen from 41% to 35%, and city councils such as Birmingham (England's second city) are bankrupt. Unemployment (4.3%) is low, but this is because much of the working-age population is not looking for work. One million people have withdrawn from the workforce since the pandemic, either because of illness, early retirement age, or because they have decided they can live on less money and one salary instead of two, or simply state benefits. The annual cost of disability benefits (received by 6.3 million people, half of whom are long-term) is (EURO)85 billion, and in localities such as Blackpool one in ten individuals live off the state. The public health bill amounts to 200 billion euros, and the pension bill to 150 billion euros. Britain has developed an economic system based on high immigration (a net total of 650,000 last year, 745,000 in 2022) to do the jobs that the natives do not want in healthcare, the countryside, construction, transport and hospitality, and to pay the pensions of an aging population. But the arrival of foreigners has a very important political cost, because of the perception that they are responsible for the deterioration of public services, the fall in salaries, the lack of housing and its enormous cost for young people, which makes it available only to the privileged, or those who are helped by their parents. Labor shortages because a million people have left the workforce since the 2020 pandemic. Some of these problems are common to other countries (the devil is the comfort of fools), and expectations of stunted growth are not unique to the UK, which could do with the estimated four to six percentage points of GDP it stands to lose because of Brexit. What is unique to Britain is the agreement of Conservatives and Labour not to raise taxes, not to increase public spending and to reduce the fiscal deficit. Which means there is and will be no money for anything. Even if the new Treasury Secretary is not going to find a note on his desk warning him of this. It is not necessary because everyone knows it. Load-Date: June 10, 2024  End of Document
