   BALLOT HAS CHANGED; ELECTION 2024 CHAOTIC 14YRS SINCE LABOUR LAST IN GOV Nats' rise and fall, 5 PMs & Truss disaster The Sun (England) June 28, 2024 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 12,13 Length: 1359 words Body   IT has been 14 years since Labour last held power across the UK. And the period since Gordon Brown was booted out of office in 2010 has been among the most turbulent spells in modern political history. Now Sir Keir Starmer is tipped to lead Labour back into No10 - quite the remarkable comeback for a party that has often looked completely lost in recent times. Only five years have passed since it suffered its worst General Election result since 1935 under left-winger Jeremy Corbyn, while the party has twice been almost completely wiped off the electoral map in Scotland. Meanwhile, the SNP - led by Nicola Sturgeon from 2014 to 2023 including during the pandemic - has continued to dominate politics here. But the Nats' long run of success could come crashing to an end on Thursday amid voter frustration over their failings at Holyrood. And after nearly a decade and a half in charge at Westminster, the Tories could be punished for the chaos of recent times - including Theresa May's Brexit deal struggles and shortest-serving PM Liz Truss's disastrous economic strategy which caused mortgages to soar. Political Reporter LEWIS McKENZIE today looks back at the twists and turns of the last four UK ballots. 2010 GENERAL ELECTION RESULT: Conservatives 306 MPs, Labour 258, Liberal Democrats 57, DUP 8, SNP 6, Sinn Fein 5 (did not take up seats), Plaid Cymru 3, SDLP 3, Green Party 1, Alliance 1. WHAT HAPPENED: Labour had been in power for 13 years - after Gordon Brown succeeded Tony Blair in 2007. The former Chancellor had taken on the top job at a difficult time. All the feelgood vibes of New Labour a decade earlier had evaporated amid anger over the decision to back the US invasions of Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq two years later. And he soon had to contend with the global financial crisis, introducing rescue packages to keep banks afloat. By the time he called an election for May 2010, support for Labour was falling while Nats - led by First Minister Alex Salmond - had replaced Labour as Holyrood's ruling party. With David Cameron leading the Tories and Nick Clegg fronting the Lib Dems, all three of the main parties had leaders facing their first General Election for the first time since the 1979 vote. In another twist they'd go head to head in TV debates, to the benefit of Mr Cameron and Mr Clegg but not so much the PM. Nats argued they should have been included but lost a legal action against the Beeb. As voters demanded change, Labour lost 91 seats while the Tories gained 96. It meant a hung parliament. But as the largest party the Tories successfully struck a deal with the Lib Dems and created a coalition government. New PM Mr Cameron took to the steps of No10 with deputy Mr Clegg, above, after thrashing out the agreement. Meanwhile the SNP fell short of Mr Salmond's 20-seat goal, returning just six MPs, while Scottish Labour won 41. Few would have predicted what would come next ... 2015 GENERAL ELECTION RESULT: Conservatives 331, Labour 232, SNP 56, Liberal Democrats 8, DUP 8, Sinn Fein 4 (did not take up seats), Plaid Cymru 3, SDLP 3, UUP 2, UKIP 1, Green Party 1. WHAT HAPPENED: The Tories managed to add 24 Commons seats - securing an overall majority and scotching predictions of another hung parliament. But their Lib Dem coalition partners suffered a humiliating fall in support. They lost 49 MPs, leaving them with just eight, punished after controversially ditching their key pledge to scrap tuition fees. Labour had been led into polling day by Ed Miliband, who had controversially defeated brother David to secure the leadership after Gordon Brown's departure. He inspired a wave of memes when he toiled with a bacon sandwich, above, but struggled to inspire voters. However the big story of the night was in Scotland, where there was a seismic political shift. Just eight months after the Yes campaign's defeat in the 2014 independence referendum, the SNP surged to an astonishing victory at the polls. Led by Nicola Sturgeon - after predecessor Mr Salmond stepped down in the wake of the referendum defeat - they claimed an incredible 56 seats, boosting their Westminster numbers by 50. In doing so they virtually wiped their rivals off the map. Labour, the Tories and Lib Dems were all left with one Scots MP apiece. The wipeout was particularly remarkable given Labour's historic dominance in Scotland. They lost 40 MPs in one go - such a horrendous result that Jim Murphy quit as Scottish Labour leader after previously boasting he would "not lose a single seat to the SNP". The shockwave would pave the way for nine years of Nats dominance, leaving Labour languishing in the wilderness. 2017 GENERAL ELECTION RESULT: Conservatives 318, Labour 262, SNP 35, Liberal Democrats 12, DUP 10, Sinn Fein 7 (did not take up seats), Plaid Cymru 4, Green Party 1. WHAT HAPPENED: If you've ever seen the video of Brenda from Bristol being told there would be an election and responding, "You're joking, not another one!" - well, this was that election. Just two years after last going to the polls, and a mere 12 months on from the EU referendum, UK voters faced yet another big decision. David Cameron's successor in No10, Theresa May, had battled on for months in the House of Commons to try to find agreement over Brexit. But the decision to leave the EU had unsurprisingly proven highly divisive. Warring factions argued over a hard or soft deal, while Remainers aimed to stop Brexit happening altogether. In a shock move, Ms May called a snap election in a bid to try to strengthen her hand. She hoped a bigger majority at Westminster would mean she'd hold greater sway as she entered negotiations with EU leaders. But despite her expectation that she could boost the ranks of Tory MPs, Labour - led by Mr Corbyn, who had taken over from Mr Miliband in 2015 - defied the odds and added 30 MPs, while Ms May lost 13. Nats shed 21 MPs while standing firmly against Brexit - after 62 per cent of Scots voted to stay in the EU in 2016. Scots Tories returned 13 MPs, Labour here won seven seats and Scottish Lib Dems claimed four. Notable Nats losses at Westminster included ex-leader Mr Salmond, above, Commons chief whip Mike Weir and Westminster leader Angus Robertson. Following the election, Ms Sturgeon said her party's plans for a second independence referendum were "undoubtedly" a factor in the SNP's losses and she promised to "listen to voters". 2019 GENERAL ELECTION RESULT: Conservatives 365, Labour 203, SNP 48, Liberal Democrats 11, DUP 8, Sinn Fein 7 (did not take up seats), Plaid Cymru 4, SDLP 2, Green Party 1. WHAT HAPPENED: Beleaguered Mrs May stepped down in May 2019 after failing to deliver a Brexit deal. She was succeeded by former London mayor Boris Johnson, after he comfortably defeated then-Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt in a leadership contest. He faced a wave of late-night parliamentary battles over Brexit as the Tories continued to rely on an agreement with the DUP. Realising he needed a clear majority to work with, Mr Johnson tried and failed to call a snap election before eventually securing one for December 2019. Many Corbyn-supporting Labour backers felt confident heading to the polls after denying Tories a majority two years earlier. But the left-winger was now up against a much more popular and charismatic opponent. And despite an infamous TV moment where he attempted to hide in a fridge to avoid being interviewed by Piers Morgan, Mr Johnson was still looked on more favourably by voters than his Labour counterpart. He went on to secure a big mandate with 365 MPs, while Labour lost 60. The SNP, which stood in strong opposition to Mr Johnson, recovered from their disappointing 2017, returning 48 MPs. Scottish Labour was again left with just one Westminster representative. Among the biggest electoral casualties was new Liberal Democrat leader Jo Swinson, above, who lost her East Dunbartonshire seat to the SNP's Amy Callaghan. In the aftermath of Labour's worst election result since 1935, Mr Corbyn confirmed he would stand down once his successor had been chosen. After a contest disrupted by the pandemic, Sir Keir Starmer became leader in April 2020 and began the job of reviving his party's fortunes. Graphic    Starm offensive ... Sir Keir expected to be next PM following more than a decade of twists and turns involving May and Brown, left, Nic and Corbyn, right, and hapless Truss, below Load-Date: June 28, 2024  End of Document
