   BIG MONEY QUESTIONS FOR PARTIES; Leaders' first TV debate of election campaign Daily Mirror June 24, 2024 Monday Edition 1, Northern Ireland  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 515 words Byline: DAVID YOUNG Body   THE fall-out from Brexit, discord over calls for a united Ireland and Stormont's financial position dominated the first TV debate of the General Election campaign in Northern Ireland. Senior representatives from Sinn Fein, the DUP, Alliance Party, Ulster Unionist Party and the SDLP participated in the UTV event yesterday. The line-up included three party leaders - the DUP's Gavin Robinson, Alliance's Naomi Long and the SDLP's Colum Eastwood. Sinn Fein was represented by its North Belfast candidate John Finucane and the UUP by its deputy leader and Lagan Valley hopeful Robbie Butler. The debate, which was largely even-tempered in nature, was held in UTV's studios in the City Quays 2 building in Belfast and moderated by the broadcaster's political correspondent Vicki Hawthorne. The hour-long programme began with Mr Robinson being challenged on the DUP's support of the UK Government command paper on post-Brexit trade used to justify dropping its blockade on Stormont. The DUP leader said he did not accept the suggestion his party had oversold the deal, as he claimed the measures achieved some progress in addressing unionist concerns over trade and sovereignty, but that work remained to be done. He added: "It's very clear the roadmap is there, we have attained progress when others either did not care or did not try and we are standing on our record of achieving for the people who elect us." ABSTENTIONIST Mr Finucane was pressed on Sinn Fein's abstentionist policy at Westminster in the context of the decisions taken on the shape of the Brexit withdrawal in recent years. He added: "If we go back and actually look at the outworking of what the British Government were intent on doing, there wasn't a single vote [in Parliament] that was going to stop the Brexit project." Mr Eastwood was asked what difference the SDLP actually made by taking its seats in Westminster. He said he firmly believed that unless elected MPs attend Parliament "you just don't count". He said his party had been a voice for "common sense" in the House of Commons. Ms Long said there was a need for voices other than the DUP to be represented at Westminster. She added: "What I want to do and what my colleagues want to do is to project that more positive element of Northern Ireland, to talk about what we can achieve and what we can do and the support that we need to be able to enable that. I think that that a A more positive voice needs to be heard." positive voice needs be heard naomi long TV DEBATE LAST Mr Butler said his party had been consistent through the Brexit process, warning of the potential damage a UK exit from the EU might inflict on Northern Ireland. He also accused Sinn Fein and the DUP of making the people of the region "suffer the consequences of political failure" with their moves to collapse powersharing for two lengthy periods. Mr Butler added: "It would be making Northern Ireland work, and it wouldn't be the belligerent politics which I grew up with, which I want to see changed." newsni@mirror.co.uk A more positive voice needs to be heard NAOMI LONG DURING TV DEBATE LAST NIGHT Graphic    TALKING POINTS Politicians with Vicki Hawthorne yesterday Load-Date: June 24, 2024  End of Document
