   Billionaire Sir Jim Ratcliffe slams Tories for failing to crack down on immigration after Brexit as he says Labour will win election MailOnline May 19, 2024 Sunday 10:24 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 422 words Byline: James Tapsfield, Political Editor For Mailonline Body   Billionaire Sir Jim Ratcliffe has slammed the Tories for failing to crack down on immigration after Brexit. The chemicals mogul and part-owner of Manchester United was a strong supporter of leaving the EU.  But in an interview with Sky News Sir Jim said the move 'didn't turn out how people anticipated', suggesting the lack of control on borders would help Labour win the next election. However, Defence Secretary Grant Shapps dismissed the criticism, insisting the Conservatives were not doomed to defeat. Sir Jim said: 'Brexit, unfortunately, didn't turn out how people anticipated. Brexit was largely about immigration - that was the biggest component of that vote. 'People were getting fed up of the influx of - the city of Southampton coming in every year, I think last year it was two times Southampton. 'A small island like the UK can't cope with vast numbers of people coming into the UK - it just overburdens the National Health Service, the traffic service, the police. 'The country was designed for 55 or 60million people and we've got 70million people, and all the services break down as a consequence. 'That's what Brexit was all about and nobody has implemented that, they just keep talking about it but nothing has been done, which is why I think we'll finish up with a change of Government, to be honest.' Sir Jim said he understands why people think 'it's probably time for a change' at the next general election but added his global chemicals company Ineos is 'apolitical'. He told Sky News: 'There's no question that the Conservatives have had a good run over the last 15, 20 years and I think most of the country feels it's probably time for a change, and I sort of get that, really.' Pressed on whether his company Ineos would donate to Labour, Sir Jim said: 'We're apolitical at Ineos, we just want a successful manufacturing sector in the UK. 'We'll talk to either Government about that.' However, Mr Shapps pointed out that Theresa May lost her majority in 2017 despite polls giving her a 20-point lead during the campaign.  Asked about Sir Jim's views, Mr Shapps said 'I actually think he's he's wrong'.  'One of his complaints was on immigration, not recognizing that a large amount of the immigration last year came from, for example, Ukrainians coming here - and I had a family live with me,' the minister said.  'They were very welcome in this country. Same with a British nationals from Hong Kong.  'So I thought there were very good reasons why, you know, this country being generous has has done those sort of things.' Load-Date: May 19, 2024  End of Document
