   BREXIT IS A GREAT BRITISH SUCCESS STORY WORTH BILLIONS; EXCLUSIVE BADENOCH HAILS 'GLOBAL BRITAIN' Brexit success proves the doom-mongers wrong The Express March 8, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,4,5 Length: 713 words Byline: Martyn Brown Body   BREXIT has reignited the UK's trade standing in global markets "worth hundreds of billions of pounds", says Kemi Badenoch. Britons are better off, the Business Secretary claims, now that the UK is free to trade outside the EU. She added: "We are a truly Global Britain now. Once mocked as a nation of shopkeepers, we know the value of free trade. And we are staying true to our heritage as a global trading nation that ruled the waves." Her patriotic rallying cry comes amid hopes that the UK could strike a bumper multi-billion pound free trade agreement with India. Talks on a deal - seen as one of the biggest Brexit prizes - are continuing. Such a mega tie-up could dramatically boost trade between the UK and India, which is currently worth £36billion. Ms Badenoch said that being outside the EU makes Free Trade Agreements with countries such as India easier to achieve. The Cabinet minister has signed massive trade deals with Australia, New Zealand and Florida in the past 12 months, while negotiations with many more countries are under way. A gargantuan tie-up with Pacific nations in the CPTPP trading bloc is also close to being rubber-stamped. Ms Badenoch went on: "Since Brexit, we've negotiated more free trade agreements than any other inde- pendent country in the world. These deals have slashed the costs of our imports and our exports, while opening up foreign markets worth hundreds of billions of pounds for British businesses like Unilever, BP and Barclays Bank." Taking a swipe at Brexit naysayers, she insisted the UK is thriving now that it is free from the shackles of Brussels: "The doom-mongers said we couldn't possibly make it on our own outside the EU. They told us we'd soon fall behind our rivals but the exact opposite has happened." She pointed to IMF number crunchers who predict that Britain will grow faster than France, Germany, Italy, and Japan over the next four years. t The trade chief said: "The UK is succeeding, not in spite of embracing free trade, but because of it." She claimed a Labour government would try to abandon much of the "progress" that has been made since Brexit. ce torsUK negotiators flew to India this week for crunch talks to seal a trade deal. t s Both Rishi Sunak and India President Narendra Modi, who is seeking a third term in office, are said to be "keen" to get the deal wrapped up. en" ed ch Ms Badenoch said at an event at Chatham House in London: "We can actually sign an agreement before the Indian election. actua Indi cas "I suspect that is not necessarily going to be the case because I don't want to use any election as a deadline. It is possible that we can sign, but I'm not using it as a deadline." p I' se l omy, th India, which is set to become the world's third-largest economy, would be the biggest country yet to strike an FTA with the UK since it left the EU bloc's trading system back in 2021. Britain hopes a deal will open up trade in whisky and UK-produced Bri whis UKhief b Idi ll i cars, above, to India as well as investment opportunities while New Delhi wants better access for manufactured goods, services and work visas. Mr Sunak had hoped to set an agreement in place during the autumn but India's general election this spring has delayed negotiations. A lack of progress in opening up Idi k Biih fi l Indian markets to British professional services, including law and accountancy firms, meant talks stalled. Issues over tariffs on electric vehicles have also proved to be a stumbling block. Former Prime Ministers Boris Johnson and Liz Truss also sought to secure free trade agreements with India, which boasts a booming economy of 1.4 billion people. A UK Government official said that the British delegation was making a "last-gasp attempt to clinch an FTA before the Indian election campaign pauses [the] talks". Visas and social security are among the most politically sensitive parts of the proposed deal. India wants to secure more visas for Indian workers plus an agreement to claw back social security payments they make while working in the UK. Speaking in the House of Commons yesterday, Business and Trade Secretary Ms Badenoch also said that trade talks with Canada have been paused. But she added that engagement remains ongoing. OPINION: PAGE 12 'The UK is succeeding because we are embracing free trade' Graphic    nt Keen...President Narendra ModiRallying cry ...Business and Trade Secretary Kemi Badenoch yesterdayPicture: CARL COURT/GETTY, IAN FORSYTH/PA Load-Date: March 8, 2024  End of Document
