   Brexit said to have made shortages of drugs worse; Medicines supply Financial Times (London, England) April 18, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 3 Length: 431 words Byline: IAN JOHNSTON Body   Drug shortages in the UK more than doubled between 2020 and 2023 as Brexit "exacerbated" already fragile medicine supply chains, according to research by the Nuffield Trust. Since leaving the EU in January 2020 the UK has faced "constantly elevated medicines shortages" including for key medicines such as antibiotics and epilepsy drugs, the think-tank said. Drugs companies made 1,643 warnings of impending shortages in 2023, compared with 648 in 2020, the research found. The higher number of shortages has also led to the government reimbursing pharmacies for buying drugs above their standard cost more frequently. These price concessions increased from 20 instances a month before 2016 to a peak of 199 a month in late 2022. "We know many of the problems are global and relate to fragile chains of imports from Asia, squeezed by Covid-19 shutdowns, inflation and global instability," said Mark Dayan, the Nuffield Trust's Brexit Programme Lead. But "exiting the EU has left the UK with several additional problems - products no longer flow as smoothly across the borders with the EU, and in the long term our struggles to approve as many medicines might mean we have fewer alternatives available", he added. The analysis comes as drug shortages have reached near record highs across Europe and the US in recent years. Some drugmakers have warned that prices have become too low for off-patent, generic medicines to continue making them. Generics make up the majority of drugs used globally. During the pandemic, severe lockdown in China also contributed to manufacturing delays. The Nuffield Trust report said Brexit had "exacerbated" the "underlying fragilities at a global and UK level" in drug supply chains. Brexit-related challenges included customs checks and additional regulation faced by manufacturers, linked to the UK regulator leaving the European Medicines Agency. These shifts have led some firms to remove the UK from their supply chains. The UK Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has also struggled to approve drugs at the same rate as the EU, making it difficult for makers of generic medicines to enter the UK market. Of drugs authorised in the year to December 2023, 56 were approved sooner in Europe than the UK, while eight have yet to be cleared. Just four were approved faster by the MHRA. The Nuffield Trust also said that surges in demand for popular drugs, such as hormone replacement therapies, and UK pricing policy had squeezed supplies in the country. The Department for Health and Social Care did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Load-Date: April 17, 2024  End of Document
