   Brexit red tape exacerbating drugs shortages i-news April 18, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 362 words Byline: Paul Gallagher Body   Brexit is fuelling shortages of life-saving drugs such as antibiotics and epilepsy medication following a "shock rise" in global supply problems, a think-tank has warned. Researchers at the Nuffield Trust urged the Government to carry out a review of the UK's "broken" medicine supply chain, and said that the impact of leaving the European Union has exacerbated the shortages in recent years. Experts called the scarcity of vital medicines a "shocking development" that was putting pressure on patients, GPs and pharmacists. The shortages are happening despite the NHS spending hundreds of extra millions trying to mitigate the problem. Pharmacy leaders also warned that they are unable to plan ahead to support patients due to a lack of communication with officials. The "Future for Health After Brexit" report highlighted "underlying fragilities" in both the global and UK medicine supply chain. It said that while problems in the UK were not caused by Brexit, leaving the EU has exacerbated them, because of the fall in the value of sterling and the UK being removed from EU supply chains. The UK has also been slower to approve drugs than the EU. Of drugs authorised in the year to December 2023, 56 drugs authorised in Europe were approved later in the UK and eight have not been approved. Four were approved faster, the report found. Mark Dayan, the Brexit programme lead at the Nuffield Trust, said: "We know many of the problems are global and relate to fragile chains of imports from Asia, squeezed by Covid-19 shutdowns, inflation and global instability. "Officials in the UK have put in place a much more sophisticated system to monitor and respond, and used extra payments to try to keep products flowing. "But Brexit has left the UK with additional problems - products no longer flow as smoothly across the borders with the EU, and in the long term our struggles to approve as many medicines might mean we have fewer alternatives available." A spokesman for the Department of Health and Social Care said: "Concessionary prices can arise for various reasons and cannot be linked to shortages. Our priority is to ensure patients continue to get the treatments they need." Load-Date: April 18, 2024  End of Document
