   BREXIT Britain is emerging as [...] The Express April 23, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 17 Length: 351 words Byline: Esther McVey Body   BREXIT Britain is emerging as a force to be reckoned with - becoming the global power those of us who backed it thought it would. Not that the doomsters and gloomsters - and the ever-dwindling band of Remoaners - would let you know that. So let me share some cheer and some facts. Britain has grown faster than France, Germany and Italy, and is now the fourth largest exporter in the world, up from seventh in 2021, helped by the UK already having secured trade deals with 73 countries plus the EU, accounting for £1.1trillion bilateral trade in 2022. The UK has now overtaken France for manufacturing, with that sector accounting for 42% of the UK's exports. And those manufacturing jobs are right across the UK - 83% are outside London and the South East, compared with 61% of the economy as a whole. This is precisely what Brexit was about - spreading opportunities across the country and expanding the UK's horizons around the world. Brexit was about being a global, outward-looking country and economy, doing trade deals with the growing parts of the world's economy, rather than being trapped in an inward-facing, backwardlooking protectionist regime in the EU. The successes don't stop there. The UK tech sector is emerging as one of our greatest success stories. We now have the third largest tech sector in the world, only behind China and the US, and valued at over $1trillion, and third for private capital investment, again only behind China and the US. We are now a dominant force in AI, accounting for around half of all AI private capital investment in Europe. So let's be proud of our successes, and celebrate them. Those on the left who don't share our national pride, and think that the UK is too insignificant on the world stage, would have us back sheltering within a shrinking Eurozone in a heartbeat. We are a great country which continues to punch above our weight with government focus on supporting entrepreneurs and exporters - through our Great Awards celebrating and highlighting that talent. Brexit has given us a new lease of life, allowing us to once again become a global trading powerhouse. Load-Date: April 23, 2024  End of Document
