   Brexit elephant in the room; Letters East Anglian Daily Times March 6, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 20,21 Length: 296 words Body   The chancellor of the exchequer Jeremy Hunt is faced with a quandary. How to convince the country to vote Conservative by cutting taxes when the people can see that the wreckage of the services all around us suggests that more needs to be spent on those services not less. We can see the increased number of potholes, the rise in the number of food banks, the struggle of our health and care services, the collapsing school and hospital buildings and the parlous state of our armed forces. All at a time when the country has just entered yet another recession. But there is an elephant in the room. That elephant is Brexit. A recession is estimated to weaken an economy by about 1pc-2pc of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The Office of Budgetary Responsibility estimated that Brexit reduced our GDP by 4pc, Goldman Sachs estimated it was 5pc and the National Institute of Economic and Social Research calculated the hit was higher than this at 6pc. In other words Brexit hit our economy up to three times as badly as a recession. All the chancellor has to do to change this narrative and potentially move an economy in recession to an economy in a mild to moderate boom is to reverse Brexit. But this is the same Government whose extreme dogmatic politics brought us Brexit. They can't admit that it was a huge economic own goal and a major political mistake. Of course any new government would not have that hanging over them. Would they be brave enough to admit that their predecessors made a mistake and start the process of reversing Brexit? Is it too much to hope for that a new government would use its common sense and do what's best for the country and our economic future? Duty to our country and its economic future should come before political dogma. JOHN DELL Shotley Load-Date: March 6, 2024  End of Document
