   British fishermen fear Labour will harm industry to seek EU deal - as Keir Starmer denies he would give Brussels more access to UK waters MailOnline June 19, 2024 Wednesday 12:56 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 577 words Byline: David Churchill Kumail Jaffer Body   Sir Keir Starmer was yesterday forced to deny he would betray British fishermen by caving into Brussels demands for greater access to UK waters. The Labour leader wants a closer relationship with the European Union and there are growing fears he will betray the vote to Leave after saying last week that 'everything' about the post-Brexit relationship needs re-negotiating. Sir Keir has described the deal struck by Boris Johnson's as 'botched' and has insisted he would strike a 'better' one if he wins the Election. Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves also said on Monday that a Labour Government would seek a deal to reduce checks on British food exports and closer alignment with some Brussels rules as part of a renegotiation of the post-Brexit trade deal. But yesterday it emerged that Brussels will demand greater access to British fishing waters for EU trawlers as the price of any trade concessions. Asked about this, Sir Keir, who campaigned for a second referendum to reverse Brexit, told reporters on the campaign trail: 'I'm not going to go into negotiations which haven't even started yet. 'But I know how important it is to defend our fishing rights and how important that is to our fishing communities. 'I think they feel they've been let down because they were told they would get a better deal than they got, and we wouldn't let them down in this and trade away their rights, because that access and that fishing is vital to those communities. 'And I think just at the moment they are feeling they've been very let down.' While Labour's manifesto said it will not re-join the bloc's single market, customs union or allow freedom of movement again, it goes on to pledge to 'deepen ties' with Brussels. Senior Eurocrats told the Times that the EU would use the talks to pursue their 'offensive interests'. This would include increased fishing access and a deal to allow young European migrants unrestricted access to the UK. 'If you look at the areas where we want to see progress then you need to look at youth mobility and fishing,' a source told the newspaper. Another added: 'If a new government wants new trade talks, France will make sure that any trade negotiations by the European Commission are linked to fisheries. 'The problem for Britain is that the marine protection areas are where the fish are that the French, and others, want to catch.' Under the post-Brexit UK-EU trade deal, 25 per cent of the overall existing EU quota in UK waters will be transferred to the UK over a five-and-a-half-year transition period to 30 June 2026. After 2026, negotiations on access and share of stocks will take place on an annual basis, although multi-annual agreements are possible. Labour will be in charge of these if it wins the Election, along with a review of the wider trade pact scheduled for next year. British diplomats were said to be alarmed last month when the EU, under pressure mainly from France, began pressing to begin the fishing negotiations and triggered a dispute mechanism over British marine environmental protection measures. In April the European Commission also tabled a 'youth mobility' proposal, including the demand that no limit would be set on numbers of people aged between 18 and 30 coming to work or study for four years, with full rights to bring their family members to Britain. Lord Frost, Mr Johnson's chief negotiator for the post-Brexit trade deal, warned yesterday that 'if the EU gives you something it wants something back..' Load-Date: June 19, 2024  End of Document
