   Business tells politicians to push trade and forget Brexit; BCC report Financial Times (London, England) March 27, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 629 words Byline: PETER FOSTER ;JIM PICKARD Body   Politicians are failing to champion UK trade and inward investment because of fears over reawakening divisions on Brexit, the British Chambers of Commerce has said. Goods exports and inward investment have struggled in the years since Britain left the EU and the trade association warned that both Conservative and Labour politicians were still failing to deliver on the promise of "Global Britain" that was made after Brexit. Baroness Martha Lane Fox, the tech entrepreneur and president of the BCC, said that after years of instability, urgent work was needed to secure the UK's reputation as an investment partner and trading nation. "There is sometimes a reluctance among politicians to either recognise problems or suggest solutions because of how they may be viewed by either side of the Brexit divide. This must stop," she said. "Our politicians must be bolder in their decision-making. They must set out a strategy on how we manage EU regulation and, where it makes sense, to diverge so British business can benefit." Lane Fox was speaking before the launch today of a BCC report setting out how the next government should move on from the Brexit debates and focus on improving trade and investment. Since Brexit, goods exports have suffered their steepest five-year drop on record, with volumes falling 7.4 per cent from 2018 to 2023, while the number of foreign direct investment projects in sectors such as creative industries and communications has also fallen, analysis by the Financial Times found. Post-Brexit Tory governments have struggled to fulfil the promise of Global Britain, having failed to sign big trade deals, including with the US. The BCC report includes many of the recommendations set out by Tory peer Lord Richard Harrington in his autumn 2023 review into how to attract more investment to the UK, including speeding up planning and creating a "concierge service" for potential international investors. Aside from seeking more stable policymaking, after a period in which there have been 15 business secretaries in as many years, the BCC called for a minister-led British Exports Council coupled with investment in advisory services to help businesses deal with red tape. Business groups have expressed frustration that trade had slipped down the political agenda because it raises awkward questions about how to address the past and future challenges of Brexit. "Trade has been put in the 'too difficult' box because it brings up political questions," said Shevaun Haviland, BCC director-general. "But we need to move past that: Brexit is done, let's just make it as easy as possible to trade to the EU and rest of the world and get on with it." Chris Southworth, secretary-general of the International Chamber of Commerce, added that trade was a key part of addressing the UK's productivity crisis, yet had been "largely absent" from the government's narrative on growth. "Now is the time to ramp up efforts on trade digitisation and make trade cheaper, faster and simpler for trading companies, especially for small companies who feel the pain and burden of trade bureaucracy the most," he said. The Labour party blamed the "constant chaos" of the recent Tory government for the UK having the lowest business investment in the G7. It said that if it won the general election it would im- pose a new industrial strategy, planning reforms and better business support. The Department for Business and Trade said the UK had exported more than £859bn of goods and services last year, had signed trade deals with Australia and Japan, and joined an 11-member Asia-Pacific trading bloc. "The IMF predicts that between 2024-2028 the UK will see the third fastest economic growth in the G7, and we continue working hard to seize post-Brexit opportunities," it added. Graphic    Martha Lane Fox: BCC president called for bolder decision-making Load-Date: March 26, 2024  End of Document
