   Capital gain if you can fix cost of living crisis; ELECTION 2024 EDINBURGH SOUTH WH WEST SEAT ON A KNIFE-EDGE x n NATS FAVES FOR VICTORY x n A TARGET FOR LABOUR x n ECONOMY KEY TO VOTE The Sun (England) June 30, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 1022 words Byline: THOMAS BROWN Body   CANDIDATES should beware - voters have warned them they will be no pushovers in the fight for their backing in Edinburgh South West. Popular sitting MP Joanna Cherry still enjoys a groundswell of support in the battleground seat - but we chatted to many residents who are fed up with the standard of services and are looking for an alternative on polling day. Transport, immigration, Brexit, education and taxation were just some of the issues preying on residents' minds in this swathe of the capital. Retired Sue Ross spoke to The Scottish Sun in the affluent village of Balerno, in the west of the constituency. The bustling village of 5,000 folk boasts a range of small independent shops, pubs and restaurants. But it's just four miles from Wester Hailes, ranked in the top five per cent of most deprived areas, with many of its residents on benefits or in low-paid work. Sue told how she wanted Rishi Sunak to remain as Prime Minster, with better transport links top of her wishlist - while she was no fan of the Labour leader. The 77-yearold said: "We need more transport here because they've stopped the bus going down to Livingston and there's a lot of older people who need to go to Livingston Hospital. "I don't want Keir Starmer in. Because he's going to cut. "I just don't like his ideas. "I would like Rishi as our Prime Minister. I prefer his ideas." Although wary to speak out on the controversial plans, she admitted backing the Tories' bid to resettle some asylum seekers overseas. Sue admitted: "Sending people back to Rwanda ... sorry, I shouldn't say that, but we can't cope with all these people coming here. "I don't understand why there's homeless people living here, yet we can hand out money to people from other countries all the time." Fellow resident Roy Cook, 75, agreed "sporadic" bus services need to improve. And while he wants to see better care of green spaces, he was generally happy with constituency life. Roy, who is yet to encounter any candidates on the campaign trail, said: "The number one issue is the bus service between here and Edinburgh. It's sporadic. "It should be a good service. There are lots of buses but because of the traffic in Edinburgh they all get stacked together. You'll get three coming and four coming at once and then not one for 40 minutes. "So that's the first priority because we're isolated out here. "There's a lot of green fields and the housing schemes have all got lots of grass and trees. The grass isn't cut often enough. Sometimes it gets to three and four feet high." For bank worker Kirsty Johnstone, currently on maternity leave, the biggest gripe was the state of services for kids - and she's hoping Labour wins and sets about delivering improvements. The 47-year-old, who similarly hasn't met any Westminster hopefuls while out and about, said: "School and nurseries are the biggest priority in this area. "There's so many young families moving into the area. "The schools are almost at capacity, you can't get into nurseries. "There's been stuff through the door but I've not seen any leaflets saying education or schools is a priority. We absolutely need change and I hope Labour wins." Slamming Nats' Holyrood record, Kirsty added: "I'd like to see the SNP out in Scotland as well. They are a bit of a disgrace, to be honest. "It's just been one disaster after another and there's just no credibility for the party any more. "John Swinney's come back as First Minister out of duty, I think, more than anything else. He's already had a shot at it. "We definitely need change in Scotland - 100%." But businesswoman Alison Harrison decided to back Nats as she believes they're the only party who'll address the impact of Brexit. The 49-year-old, of nearby Colinton, insisted she'd never vote for Labour or Tories. Alison explained: "One of the biggest issues is Europe and Brexit - the thing that no other party is talking about. But the SNP are talking about it. Brexit has impacted Scotland massively despite the fact we didn't vote for it. "The candidates need to be talking about Europe and its importance. They also need to be talking from a Scotland-centric point of view. "If I lived in England I wouldn't vote for Labour and Conservative but thank goodness in Scotland we have another option in the SNP. "Whatever happens in the election, it will be a continuation of what has been happening for decades. Either way it won't be good for Scotland." Property management firm owner John Horsburgh told how he's set to vote tactically in a bid to oust Nats. He believes change is required but fears Sir Keir's Labour could hike capital gains tax, to the detriment of his business - which employs 24. John said: "In recent years the biggest impact on our industry has been not being able to offset your full mortgage interest against your rents or your income. "It's made it very difficult for highrate taxpayers to be investing in buy-to-let mortgages and rental properties. So that has had an impact on our landlords and their ability to operate at a profit." But he feared local candidates wouldn't do anything to help his firm, which looks after more than 2,000 privately rented homes in the capital. He explained: "I think Labour are hiding the possibility that they'll introduce some capital gains tax on investment properties. "If they bring parity between capital gains tax rates and personal income tax rates, it could be prohibitive. And that would discourage landlords from building portfolios. "SNP? I just despair, if I'm honest. All the legislation they've brought has made it very difficult for landlords to operate. From a business point of view, I think I have to vote strategically to displace the SNP. "Because they've got a terrible record in the Scottish Government. "I am voting Labour on this occasion because I do want rid of the Tories and I do want rid of the SNP. "It's a fairly obvious choice." thomas.brown@the-sun.co.uk 6I don't want Keir as PM as he is going to cut7 SUE ROSS 6Number 1 issue here is the public bus service7 ROY COOK 6SNP are a disgrace, I'd like to see them out7 KIRSTY JOHNSTONE 6Nats only ones talking about Brexit & Europe 7 ALISON HARRISON Load-Date: June 30, 2024  End of Document
