   Council transport policies have slammed the brakes on Aberdeen footfall Aberdeen Press and Journal May 22, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 DC Thomson Co Ltd All Rights Reserved Section: AGD; Pg. 26 Length: 1093 words Byline: Struan Nimmo Body   Sir, - It should come as no surprise to city councillors and "advisers" that there has been a staggering 500,000 drop in footfall to the city (P&J, May 15). Bus gates along with other traffic-restricted areas (eg Castlegate, Old Aberdeen), over-complex council car park charging systems, with payment apps that often do not work, and impending low emission zones, etc, have deterred people from visiting the city. Add to this the loss of so many shops such as John Lewis and Marks and Spencer et al means there is little incentive for those of us who live in the shire to come to the city. I live in Aboyne and now shop in Inverurie, Banchory, Westhill and Stonehaven where I am welcomed, parking is free and there are lots of shops. It's time for the council and their advisers to wake up and smell the coffee and ditch their policy of discouraging motorists from entering the city centre. And if they think that my wife and I, at 76, will leave the car at Kingswells park and ride then walk or hire a cycle - oh no, that project has failed - to visit the few shops left then struggle back to Kingswells with my purchases, think again - it's not going to happen. Mike Rasmussen, Aboyne. Leavers' have got their facts twisted Sir, - John Callender (Letters, May 15) uses questionable data and statistics to list some of the supposed positives of Brexit to undermine many of the purported doom-laden claims made by the Remain side. He fails to mention, however, the impact Brexit has had on goods availability and choice, fuelling huge price hikes on products and services, and the struggle working households have had to endure to make ends meet since. It doesn't take a diploma in economics to work out that if goods take longer to process at borders - due to increased paperwork, computer entry or physical checks - it will lead to an increase in price, as someone has to meet the increased cost of the labour for the additional time and tasks, and fuel used. There are now many European suppliers, on whom we previously relied for goods, that no longer wish to supply to the UK due to increased paperwork and costs. Similarly, no doctorate is required to realise that if much of the hospitality and healthcare sector relied on European workers, then things wouldn't run quite as effectively if they were all barred from working in the UK. But the most amusing part of his argument is that apparently it was the Remain voters who were duped, while the majority of Leave voters did so to ensure all decisions regarding the UK were taken within the UK - in other words, to "take back control" which, according to Mr Callender, was "not the subject of any campaign of disinformation". Really? Were Nigel Farage and Jacob Rees Mogg (to name only two) not consistently banging on about us being "controlled by Brussels"? The reality of so-called EU control over UK policy only ever stretched to about 12% of UK Government rules, all concerning the movement and quality of goods and treatment of people (required for free movement to work) - rules consistent throughout the EU, and rules that would be part of any similar trade agreement. Who knew? We could always have had blue passports if we wished, and could always have set our own rules around illegal immigration although obviously not Mr Callander and his fellow Brexiteers, as they were always told the opposite. Douglas Black, Alford. Britons have been conned over Brexit Sir, - I wonder if John Callender got his Brexit economic facts from The Beano (Letters, May 15). Does he not realise that virtually every economics expert agrees that Brexit is an unmitigated disaster? People were conned by a group of far-right little Englanders led by a serial liar who then became prime minister. Recent polls show that well over 50% of Leave voters regret their decision. The sooner an independent Scotland is back in the European Union the better. WA Ross, Aberdeen. Landscape marred by SNP stupidity Sir, - It was shocking to watch clueless politicians on Thursday night's BBC Question Time, from Aberdeen, answering the question - is there a future for North Sea oil? The Scottish Government has positively encouraged foreign-owned multinationals to carpet our greatest tourist asset - the finest landscapes in western Europe - with demonstrably useless wind farms and pylons, sorry subsidy farms, because that's what they really are. The Japanese, Italian and other governments will make millions from our taxes extorted from the poorest bill-payers in society. They are now handing over our pristine seas, fishing grounds and sparkling horizons to be carpeted by foreign-owned multinationals for a pittance. To cap it all, after 30 years of eye-watering subsidies, during the very show (Question Time) and all week the entire fleet of 11,000 entirely parasitic, giant, industrial bird-mincers was struggling to provide the National Grid with 3%. What was providing the electricity and keeping the lights on during the show? Gas. By the way, the entire hugely damaging array will be worn out rusting hulks and need replacement long before 2050. SNP Scotland really has become a world leader in tragic stupidity. George Herraghty, Moray. Writing on wall for delusional Tories Sir, - Some Tory MPs really do believe they can win the next election, and this is part of the problem - delusion and belief in a false dawn. Trendy Theresa tried to increase her majority but almost delivered Jeremy Corbyn instead. Did bungling Boris really believe that Brexit was done? Chancellor Sunak's Covid giveaway bankrupted Britain with £7 billion lost. Terrible Truss's policy for growth had merit but was naively implemented with disastrous consequences. Nothing was left to grow. Nevertheless, credit where credit's due - both Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss are record breakers as the first millionaire Hindu PM and the shortest-serving PM respectively. But they're Conservative Party wreckers too. The writing is on the wall with no way back for the Tories. Indeed, few will make it back to Parliament. The party needs to follow Jeremy Corbyn's example. Time spent in the wilderness, time for reflection, time to reinvent itself and rediscover its principles. Reform without reform. Bill Maxwell, Keith. Kind community is warmly praised Sir, - Thank you to the Balmedie community. Following the tragic accident at our church hall on Wednesday May 15, we would like to thank the local Balmedie residents for all the respect, love and warm sympathy that has been expressed. It is deeply appreciated by the congregation. The Plymouth Brethren Christian Church, Eigie Road, Balmedie. Load-Date: May 22, 2024  End of Document
