   David Cameron is a disgrace to Britain telegraph.co.uk June 16, 2024 Sunday 2:36 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 847 words Byline: By Nigel Farage Highlight: Smug, complacent, and snobby, he has convinced me I was right to offer Britain a stronger alternative to a hopeless Tory opposition Body   Why would anybody trust the Conservative Party to make the big decisions about the future of Britain, when they can’t even agree on what to do about Nigel Farage? Former Tory home secretary Suella Braverman last week urged her party to“welcome” me and “unite the right”.  But Saturday’s front page headlines had Tory foreign secretary David Cameron hurling insults at me and declaring that “Farage has no place in Tory Party”  – apparently because of my “incredibly divisive” approach. If Lord Cameron is worried about damaging divisions, he should look a bit closer to home. The terminally divided Tory Party has proved itself incapable of effective government over the past 14 years – and is set to be even more hopelessly split in opposition, after it gets hammered on July 4th.  That – and Cameron’s complacent, arrogant dismissal of the biggest issue facing the country – is why I’m more convinced than ever that it’s right to stand against them. It’s why more and more people now rightly see Reform UK as the real opposition to the coming Labour government.  Cameron has the nerve to claim that, after 14 years of failure, the Tories now have a plan to deal with Britain’s immigration crisis. By contrast, he says, all I offer is “inflammatory language and hopeless policy”. By “inflammatory language”, does he mean my stating the fact that 3.5 million immigrants have come to the UK over the past three years alone ? Or that, under the current the Tory Government, one more migrant enters the UK every minute? Or that, under the Conservatives and Labour governments before them, more people have come to the UK over the past 25 years than in all of British history before that?  Does the Tory Government now consider these plain facts to be too “inflammatory” for the ears of the British people? (The BBC seems to think so, having desperately fact-checked my statements but failed to find any untruths.) If anybody is being dishonest, it is those who refuse to admit that our country simply cannot cope with this uncontrolled influx, economically or culturally. As for “hopeless policy”, that’s a subject that Rishi “Rwanda plan” Sunak knows all about. By contrast Reform UK’s policies – to freeze all non-essential immigration, detain and deport all illegal migrants and leave the European Convention on Human Rights – offer realistic hope of addressing the migration crisis and stopping European judges overruling the will of the British people. This is at the heart of our Contract with the British people, which we are launching on Monday. Eight years is a long time in politics, yet Cameron and the Conservatives appear to have forgotten nothing and learned nothing since the EU referendum of 2016.  Perhaps I shouldn’t blame Lord Cameron for his personal animus towards me, since the success of our Leave campaign did cost him his job as Prime Minister. But the Tories’ repeated betrayals of the British people and the Brexit they voted for is unforgivable.  Cameron called that referendum in the smug belief that the Project Fear run by him and his chancellor, George Osborne, would hoodwink the British electorate into voting to Remain in thrall to the EU. When instead 17.4m voted Leave – lest we forget, the biggest vote for anything in British history – he flounced off and left Theresa May and the Remainer-dominated parliament to try to sell out Brexit. The victory of my Brexit Party in the 2019 European elections drove Mrs May from Number 10 and brought in Boris Johnson who – with my help – won the general election that year on the promise to “get Brexit done”. Yet five years and three Tory prime ministers later, we are patently no nearer to taking back control of our borders and our laws. That betrayal of Brexit is ultimately why millions of furious voters have turned their backs on the remains of the Conservative Party. It is why Keir Starmer’s Labour is set to win on July 4th, despite the lack of public enthusiasm for his party, his personality or his six big election pledges – which do not include a word about migration. It is also why I decided to stand for election. In two weeks, Reform UK has breathed life into this zombie general election and overtaken the Tories in major opinion polls, winning the support of millions of people across the country who have simply had enough of the establishment parties. In his lowest personal insult at the weekend, the Tory Foreign Secretary accused me of using “dog whistle” politics to play on popular prejudices. As ever, the biggest insult here is directed at the voters, who snobs such as Lord Cameron of Chipping Norton see as dumb mutts to be herded into pens. I trust the good judgement of the British people to see through such Tory prejudice. Cameron is right about one thing. There is “no place for Farage” in this divided, sinking hulk of a Conservative Party. My place is leading the real opposition to Labour, and building the resistance to the threat of a one-party state over the next five years. The last conservatives in the Tory Party, such as Suella Braverman, are very welcome to join the revolt.  Load-Date: June 16, 2024  End of Document
