   Doubts raised over demand for pints of wine ahead of September launch standard.co.uk May 2, 2024 Thursday 10:02 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Evening Standard Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS NEWS,BUSINESS; Version:2 Length: 521 words Byline: Richard Wheeler Highlight: The SNP’s Patrick Grady said the Government should admit there is ‘little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit’. Body   Pint-sized bottles of wine are expected to be allowed on UK shelves from September, a business minister has said, amid doubts over demand. Kevin Hollinrake said several changes to pre-packaged wine sizes are due to come into force on September 19, as he insisted they will support the “thriving” UK wine sector by providing opportunities for “innovation and greater choice”. But the SNP’s Patrick Grady said the Government  should admit there is “little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit  benefit”. I can't imagine why anyone would be complaining about the sale of pints of wine. If he (Patrick Grady) doesn't like it, he doesn't have to buy it Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch The Glasgow North MP went on to urge the Government to “admit that its Brexit dream of people quaffing pints of wine” was always a “fantasy”, adding: “In fact the reality is a Brexit nightmare of border checks, of reduced consumer choice and of business closures.” Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch  replied: “I can’t imagine why anyone would be complaining about the sale of pints of wine. “If he doesn’t like it, he doesn’t have to buy it.” In December, the Government announced the move to introduce the 568ml size would sit alongside 200ml and 500ml measures already available. Pint bottles of Champagne were sold in the UK before Britain joined the European Common Market and were on shelves until 1973. But their production ceased as they did not comply with EU weights and measures rules. Will the Government admit that the reality is there's been little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit and in fact it's entirely possible pints of wine will never be stocked on UK shelves? Patrick Grady MP Mr Hollinrake told the Commons: “The 568ml pint quantity is one of several changes in pre-packed wine sizes that are expected to come into force on September 19 2024, supporting the thriving UK wine sector by providing opportunities for innovation and greater choice.” Mr Grady said Mr Hollinrake’s answer was “nowhere near as definitive” as the Government press release from December, which was headlined: “Pints of wine stocked on Britain’s shelves for the first time ever.” Mr Grady said: “Not will be stocked, not might be stocked, not could be stocked, not to be stocked – it implied that pints of wine were and are available to buy right now in shops across the UK. “Will the Government admit that the reality is there’s been little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit and in fact it’s entirely possible pints of wine will never be stocked on UK shelves?” Mr Hollinrake replied: “Well it’s never difficult to distinguish the right honourable gentleman from a ray of sunshine, is it? “Our wine industry is thriving. Over 900 vineyards across Great Britain, the UK wine industry produced 12.2 million bottles of wine in 2022 and our new post-Brexit powers provide new options, including new legislation which aligns existing sizes across still and sparkling pre-packed wine so that both can be sold in 200ml and 500ml quantities, which we know there is good demand for.” Load-Date: May 2, 2024  End of Document
