   El Brexit CE Noticias Financieras English March 16, 2024 Saturday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 508 words Body   The Brexit... Why talk about the Brexit at this point? Because in England in 2016 vital decisions were made for the life of all the English people, the Brexit, short for"British Exit", refers to the decision of the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, a process that began with the referendum held on June 23, 2016, in which 51.9% of voters opted to leave the EU. About 75% of voters aged 18-24 (only 64% of them participated) opposed Brexit that June 23, 2016. Half of the voters decided the fate of the entirety of English people. "The future of this country has been decided by those who will not be here to live with the consequences. What a disaster," wrote on his Twitter account a young man who identifies himself as @Thomas Amor1 and who lives in Manchester, in the north of England." Only 25% of young people who voted did so in favor of England's exit from the EU. This 25% added to those who did not vote, prevented making a majority for Britain not to leave Brexit. Apathy and misinformation made the difference in everyone's life. Today, it is the young people who suffer the consequences most severely, one of them declared, "Brexit closes job opportunities for me in 27 European nations". On the other hand, those who study outside England are now considered international students and therefore pay significantly higher tuition fees, the same happens with their expenses, especially accommodation, when before they were considered home. What happened? Quite simply, indifferent young people, along with their elders and those driven by chauvinistic sentiment who voted them out, caused the disaster. If only in Mexico we could see ourselves in that mirror and act accordingly, all of us, especially the youth, who could be the victims. This 2024, in Mexico, we will be making very important decisions; the future of 126 million, 705 thousand, 138 people will be decided at the ballot box, a destiny that will be determined by a little more than 98 million compatriots registered in the electoral roll, of which almost 36 million are young people under 34 years of age, that is, almost 37% of the nominal list. And given the statistical fact that less than 60% of Mexicans vote in our country, in these next elections young people could write their future if they so choose. I hope that what happened to the English does not happen to them and that they do not have to suffer the consequences of the decisions that others made for them. In these next elections, whatever the outcome, we will all be involved, whether we vote or not, but young people will definitely be the most affected, because they not only have more labor and/or student needs, but they will live longer in this Mexico of ours. Let us hope that each young person is capable of understanding this, that they analyze the facts, assume their civic responsibility, go to the polls and make the best decision. For a dignified and united Mexico, let us make a pact to ensure that young people vote and do so in a free and informed manner. Thank you. Los Mochis, Sin. March 15, 2024. Load-Date: March 17, 2024  End of Document
