   Election sleight of hand; Letters East Anglian Daily Times May 29, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 NLA Media Access Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 20 Length: 363 words Body   At last. We have an election, an opportunity to draw the shenanigans of the past decade to a halt. I used to think that Rishi Sunak was essentially a decent man, albeit misguided, but having heard him on the Today Programme last week, I no longer give him that credit. Sadly, he went straight to the cesspit in his bid to create the illusion that divided Britain is doing very well. Fortunately, programme presenter Nick Robinson called him out. One information sleight of hand that he used was that the UK economy was growing faster than the US economy. This he did by extracting a three-month piece of economic www.data.No responsible economist would do that. In truth (always assuming that we want it) Robinson pointed out that in the past three years the US economy has grown by 3% whereas the UK economy grew by 0.2%. Sunak, was left to wriggle on the hook. Off the hook, he went on to say that he'd 'got Brexit done'. Got Brexit done! Just two days previously news broke that the government had thrown over £500 million of tax-payers' money - yes, our money - into greasing the wheels of the damaging post-Brexit trade deal with Northern Ireland, Brexit being something Sunak has always believed to be a good idea. And that's Northern Ireland! He then claimed that he was on top of immigration, this being from a man who couldn't organise himself to have an umbrella in a rain storm. He didn't explain why, from a migration trickle across the Channel before Brexit we now have a situation where more unauthorised migrants arrived by that route this year than any year previously. When Nigel Farage screamed at us hysterically all those years back that 'they're coming', it was the only thing he told us that was true. And we have his party, the Brexit Party (now Reform UK), also to thank for that. It's not all down to beleaguered Rishi. And so the interview went on. It was excruciating. My only hope is that the Lib-Dems, the Greens and the Labour party have the courage and wit not to leave the 'calling out' just to BBC fact checkers alone. That would be unforgivable. If ever there was a open goal they have it, but they seem totally unaware of it. RICHARD HARE, Woodbridge. Load-Date: May 29, 2024  End of Document
