   EU awaits French election result with deafening silence CE Noticias Financieras English June 29, 2024 Saturday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1075 words Body   Like other leaders of the far-right, Marine Le Pen drew some political lessons from Brexit and has quietly left behind her unpopular and more radical ideas against European integration. Electorally, the strategy is paying off for them, as seen in Italy and the Netherlands and could happen today in France. In Brussels, despite the deafening silence with which the European Union and its leaders are observing these elections, reminiscent of that which preceded Brexit, no one is under any illusions about the positions of Le Pen, who eight years ago enthusiastically cheered Brexit. The shadow of BrexitIn Brussels, the leaders observe these elections as those of Brexit, a result that Marine Le Pen enthusiastically cheered. The RN leader encouraged the French to continue along the same path, nor on the risks that the ultra-nationalist ideas of National Rally (RN) entail for the EU, a project that depends largely on the maintenance of the integrationist impulses and its values from its founding partners. The EU has a stake in these elections, but, as with the referendum on the UK's exit from the Union, the conclusion that has been reached is that any intervention, however well-intentioned, would be counterproductive. In the Brexit consultation there was no second round, but in the French legislative elections there was, could there be a change of strategy? "The Commission never interferes in elections and will continue to do so," say EU sources. Without going to the extremes of the United Kingdom, the political terrain is complicated. France regularly stands out in Eurobarometer polls as one of the countries where the perception of the benefits of the EU for the country is the lowest, where there is the greatest pessimism about the future of the EU and where there is the least confidence in the EU institutions. It is, after all, one of the two countries, together with the Netherlands, that voted against the European Constitution. Giorgia Meloni deepens her position of isolation in the EU by voting against Costa and Kallas and not supporting Von der Leyen. With this breeding ground, one of RN's major electoral promises, clearly inspired by the so-called British rebate once demanded by Margaret Thatcher, consists in demanding a discount of 2 billion euros per year on France's annual contributions to the EU budget. Various experts rule out that the country meets the requirements for such a demand, which, moreover, due to the multiannual structure of the Community budget, is impossible to apply in the short term (it would be another thing if, when the next financial framework is agreed, the NR sits in the Elysée). Brussels has let the figures speak, rather than its politicians, to dismantle RN's "false promises" and explain that, beyond the direct return it receives from European programs, France derives great benefits from the existence of a strong single market to export to. "The numbers speak for themselves," they say. The fear, in the short term, of a destabilization of the EU is there. "Political cohabitation in France is not impossible," and "it is not good news for Europe," says a senior European source, who predicts that the dispute over the division of powers between the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister will have European repercussions. "I do not exclude an instrumentalization of the European debates", he adds. The spending promises in the various electoral programs herald tensions in the application of the new EU fiscal rules, while the reaction of the markets to the elections reveals, at the very least, the fear that the French economy will become a destabilizing factor on a European scale, with the risk premium of its public debt rising in relation to that of Germany. The French elections loomed large over the summit that the EU-27 held on Thursday in Brussels. The issue was not on the agenda, "but of course everyone is talking about it," said Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, one of Le Pen's staunchest allies. "France is decisive in Europe, and big things can happen this Sunday," he added. Although the Constitution is clear on the external representation of the French Republic and there is no doubt that at the upcoming summit it will be Macron who will represent it, the possibility of a political cohabitation casts doubt on who will express the country's position on certain issues. Military aid to Ukraine, for example, may be compromised. Asked about this, Ukrainian President Volodymir Zelenski said he hoped the country would be "on the right side of history." The view from UkraineMilitary aid could be compromised. Zelenskii; "I hope (France) will be on the right side of history." European diplomatic sources attribute some of the political maneuvering seen at this European Council to the French electoral climate. For example, the extensive list of amendments to the new Strategic Agenda presented at the last minute by Macron and the German Chancellor, Olaf Scholz. According to European sources, it seemed designed to tense and isolate the Italian Prime Minister, Giorgia Meloni. They failed, they explain, because the leaders of the EPP closed ranks in defense of the agreed text, which includes a hardening of policies in both matters that is nothing more than a reflection, beyond the Italian case, of the progressive rightward shift of the European Council. The EU is at stake in the French elections, but any intervention could be counterproductive. The same is suspected with regard to the efforts of the Socialists and Liberals to highlight Meloni's isolation in the negotiations on the EU's top positions, which went ahead without unanimity. Attempts by European Council President Charles Michel and EPP leaders to bring Meloni into the pact only succeeded in getting him to abstain on Ursula von der Leyen as a candidate for Commission President. His lack of pragmatism shocked many diplomats. While the Czech and Slovak leaders went along with the pact, the Italian voted against Portuguese socialist António Costa, the future president of the European Council, and against Estonian liberal Kaja Kallas as head of European diplomacy. "There was a desire to show that she was not a kingmaker," as the Anglo-Saxon press presented Meloni before 9-J, says a senior European official. Meloni was castled, and neither the Socialists nor Macron wanted to participate in a normalization of the ultra-right. It is the decision that France now has in its hands. Load-Date: June 30, 2024  End of Document
