   EU wants fishing access to agree trade deal with Labour The Times (London) June 18, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 901 words Byline: Oliver Wright ; Bruno Waterfield Body   Brussels is to demand greater access to British fishing waters as the price of trade concessions for a future Labour government. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, said yesterday that Labour would seek a deal to reduce checks on British food exports and closer alignment with some European Union rules as part of a renegotiation of the Brexit trade deal. Senior figures in Brussels have said, however, that the EU would use the talks to pursue their "offensive interests", including increased fishing access and a deal to allow young European migrants unrestricted access to the UK. The negotiations are likely to be an early test of an incoming Labour administration that has pledged to improve the UK's trade and investment relationship with the EU by "tearing down unnecessary barriers to trade". One EU source said Brussels would take a "package approach" to any negotiation, which would require concessions from the UK. "If you look at the areas where we want to see progress then you need to look at youth mobility and fishing," the source said. European and British diplomatic sources said that in recent weeks the EU had indicated what it would demand in return for easing trade via regulatory deals on food safety and chemicals. British diplomats were alarmed last month that the EU, under pressure from France, began pressing to begin the fishing negotiations and triggered a dispute mechanism over British marine environmental protection measures. "If a new government wants new trade talks, France will make sure that any trade negotiations by the European Commission are linked to fisheries," a source said. "The problem for Britain is that the marine protection areas are where the fish are that the French, and others, want to catch. "Increased trade versus protecting the marine environment? It is a difficult, either/or question." Labour's manifesto does not give details of its fishing policy, which party sources said was under development. In April the European Commission also tabled a "youth mobility" proposal, including the demand that no limit would be set on numbers of people aged between 18 and 30 coming to work or study for four years, with full rights to bring their family members to Britain. Although Europeans from all 27 member states would be able to come to the UK, young Britons would have to choose one EU country. Brussels also wanted rules that would let EU students avoid paying international fees at British universities and be treated the same as British students. At the time the move was rejected by Labour, which said it had "no plans for a youth mobility scheme". However, a Brussels source said this would be a high priority for a new European Commission. "Labour do not want to discuss free movement but, for young people, the EU does," the source said. "It is an offensive interest. Britain is happy to have more mobility for Swedes or Germans but the European side will demand that it is unrestricted ? that means Romania and Bulgaria too." Reeves used an interview with the Financial Times to signal a push to revisit parts of Boris Johnson's Brexit deal, including seeking closer alignment with EU rules in areas such as the chemicals sector and a better deal for workers in the City of London. "We would look to improve our trading relationship with Europe," she said. "I don't think anyone voted Leave because they were not happy that chemicals regulations were the same across Europe." Behind the story As every British minister who has negotiated with Brussels since Brexit knows, there is a price for everything (Oliver Wright writes). And although the EU may be delighted to see the back of a Conservative government, that doesn't mean there will be a wholesale change in approach when it comes to a new Labour administration. This is for two main reasons. The first is that Brussels is under pressure from member states to meet their priorities when it comes to post- Brexit trade arrangements. For coastal countries such as France that means improving the highly restrictive fishing deal that was agreed as part of the original Brexit trade deal. For other countries, particularly in eastern Europe, that means reopening some elements of free movement that were lost when Britain left the EU. Any "new" deal would have to address these concerns and would, to a greater or lesser extent, require concessions from the UK. The second reason is that although the EU does want to improve relations with the UK it is still implacably opposed to what it always used to call "cherry picking". In reality it was not cherry picking that it was opposed to (as it did a fair bit of its own) but any idea that the UK would be seen to be getting the best of both worlds out of Brexit. That means that even if the diplomatic view improves fundamentally the EU will be loath to grant concessions that would help sectors such as financial services, where it now sees the UK as a competitor. Instead what Brussels would like to do is negotiate a deal with Labour that incrementally moves the UK back into the EU's orbit, while maintaining most of the disadvantages of being outside the single market and customs union. How Labour responds to this and how much political capital Starmer is prepared to spend getting a new deal with the EU is still a big unknown. There is an obvious danger that both sides think the other will be more prepared to make concessions than they actually are. Load-Date: June 18, 2024  End of Document
