   Forget the scare stories about hormone-treated beef - we've killed our free-trade deal with Canada out of fear of the EU. It's time we truly championed Brexit Mail on Sunday (London) April 20, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 19 Length: 1161 words Byline: Boris Johnson Body   IWAS in Canada the other day, and it struck me the Canadians are an enviably healthy bunch. They live about a year longer, on average, than we do ? a whole year. I suppose they lead a fairly active life. They play a lot of ice hockey. They ski and they canoe. But the doctors would probably say it was their diet, so I have researched the matter. It's not just the waffles and maple syrup that distinguish the Canadian diet from our own. It's the beef. They eat almost three times as much beef as we do, in that the average Canuck gorges him or herself on 4st 6lb of beef per year. The average Brit can afford only 1st 7lb of beef per year. I am not going to claim that this Canadian longevity is solely a function of their beef habit. I will not draw a strong correlation between the Canadian love of hamburgers and steaks, and the whole extra year of life that they get to watch their grand children grow up. All I will say is that the population of Canada does not appear to be suffering the slightest health disad vantage from eating so much Cana dian beef; whereas we Brits eat much less beef, and precisely zero Canadian beef, and are dying a whole 12 months earlier. So I am sure you will be as astonished as I was to learn the ostensible reason why Britain has just scuppered a free trade deal with Canada. And I mean scup pered, by us ? freebooting*, buc caneering post -Brexit Britain. We have kicked over the table and walked out of the talks, so that British cheese makers and car makers now face swingeing and job -destroying tariffs, and millions of consumers on both sides of the Atlantic will have to absorb yet higher prices; and all because ? wait for it ? our Government will not allow British people to eat so much as a morsel of Canadian beef. Why this mad prohibition? They say it is because the Canadians, like the Americans, sometimes use hormones to rear their cattle. I hope you will not mind if I am sceptical about this explanation. There is no evidence whatever that this method is harmful, to man or beast. The U.S. and Canada are both highly litigious, health -obsessed societies, and if the way their farmers rear beef had adverse effects, believe me, we would know all about it. What do we eat, when we go in our millions as tourists to North America? Hormone -treated beef - . Of course we do. Do we turn up our noses at the steaks in Disney land, in protest at American animal husbandry? Come off it. Even if there were consumers in Britain who superstitiously insisted on avoiding such imports, you could satisfy them, surely, with proper labelling. So why are we using this pre text to junk a great free trade deal with Canada? If we can't do a deal with Canada, what hope of a free trade deal with America, an enormous and natural market for the UK, and already our single biggest trading partner? What has got into us? It is cer tainly true that there has long been a big campaign by some farmers against the import of North American beef. But it's not that they object in principle to the use of hormones, not really. They know there are no health issues and, frankly, we are in no position to lecture the Canadians about what we feed our cattle. You will remember the appall ing BSE epidemic of 1996 and the foot -and-mouth epidemic of 2001. The Canadians haven't had any thing like it. The objection to Canadian beef is not about principle or morality. It's not about human health. It's not about animal welfare. It's about price. Some British farmers object that the Canadi ans are able to use these treat ments to produce beef more efficiently, and so they fear that they will be undercut. They fear that British consum ers will ? if given the choice -? go for the cheap imported meat, and that they will lose market share. They believe that this would be deeply unfair ? and they are right. It would indeed be unfair on British beef farmers to allow them to be undercut in their domestic market by hormone treated beef from North America, when they are forbid den from using the same treat ments in the UK. To which the answer is obvious. You don't allow this issue to become a permanent block on free trade between Britain and North America ? which, I am afraid, it is now becoming. You don't pointlessly push up the price of food for British consumers, especially after the inflationary pain we have just experienced. You do the logical thing, the free market thing. You use your Brexit freedom. You tell British farmers that beef from Canada will indeed be slowly and gradually admitted to our supermarkets ? properly labelled to show its rearing and prove nance, and you tell them at the same time that they can use these harmless techniques them selves. You say that, if they choose, they can use the meth ods that are commonplace in Canada and the U.S. Of course they don't have to do so. But if they want to compete by using the same techniques as the Canadians, then they will no longer be forbidden. That liberation will be good for the consumer, good for business, good for trade, and good for British exports of everything ? including beef. It will be good for British farming. Why aren't we doing it? Why are we deliberately scuppering our own free trade deals, when this country's prosperity was built on free trade? Here I am afraid we come to the dark heart of the problem, the awful truth no one will admit. We aren't taking this opportunity because we are swinging back into the force field of EU law. Under the Windsor Framework, Northern Ireland is obliged to accept the same sanitary and phytosanitary standards as the EU. And, as some of us predicted, the UK as a whole is being forced into dynamic alignment, observ ing EU rules over which we have no influence and no control. It is ridiculous and unnecessary, and cowardly. We have killed (and I mean killed) the free trade deal with Canada because we no longer have the nerve to deviate from EU policy on hormone treated beef, not out of respect for our farming interest, but out of fear of Brussels. This Tory Government has done great things with Brexit. It was at least partly thanks to Brexit that we had the fastest vaccination roll -out, the Aukus pact and a distinctive UK approach to Ukraine, among many other benefits. Brexit still offers enormous potential on everything from data to bioscience to AI. But if Starmer wins ? and a vote for Reform is a vote for Starmer -? then we will be back in the single market, de facto and eventually by law. We will throw away our freedom. We will spinelessly give back control. We will become a vassal state of Brussels. There is only one hope ? that this Government remembers in time to champion Brexit and to fight, fight, fight ? before it is too late -? for all the benefits that flow from being a truly independ ent country. That includes free trade with North America. dictionary corner Freebooting: The practice of living from plunder or piracy Do we turn our noses up at steak in Disneyland? We will become a vassal state of Brussels Load-Date: April 20, 2024  End of Document
