   Gavin Robinson ate humble pie to stop unionists being swallowed up thetimes.co.uk June 1, 2024 Saturday 11:01 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 982 words Byline: Newton Emerson Highlight: The DUP leader’s concession that his party oversold the Brexit deal signals a new approach designed to head off the advance of nationalists before the election Body   Gavin Robinson was ratified as DUP leader last Wednesday, having served as interim leader since Sir Jeffrey Donaldson resigned in March. He promptly demonstrated a quality that his party has always lacked: contrition. The Belfast East MP conceded that the DUP had oversold its Brexit deal. There should have been more “cautious realism”, he told party members — comments he repeated on Radio Ulster the following morning. Robinson still presented the deal as a success but re-spun it as a flawed work in progress, with “some important gains worth banking”. “On balance, we judged that it was right to return to Stormont in the interests of seeing local decisions made for the benefit of all our citizens,” he said. He pledged to “build on the progress” of the deal and continue “removing the application of EU law in our country and the internal Irish Sea border it creates”. This was Robinson’s inaugural speech as leader and the official launch of the DUP’s general election campaign. His remarks mean the DUP will not have to fight that election while standing over untenable claims. When the deal, known as Safeguarding the Union, was struck in January, Donaldson said it “takes away the border within the UK”. He promised “zero checks, zero paperwork” and an “end to dynamic alignment with EU law”. Robinson supported these and similar statements. He has had to eat humble pie to disavow them. Backing down from an indefensible position might seem like basic politics but it is hardly guaranteed from a party with the DUP’s prickly pride. Much of unionism’s Brexit fiasco could be blamed on the DUP repeatedly failing to bank gains and move on. Robinson’s contrition is not without cunning, of course. It positions the DUP between two critiques from its unionist opponents: the UUP says the deal was not worth a two-year Stormont boycott; the TUV says the boycott should have continued to get a better deal. Both parties sounded exasperated at having their attack lines triangulated. TUV leader Jim Allister said the DUP had “blatantly lied” about Safeguarding the Union. “Now, they say EU law must go and the sea border must go — the very things they told us they had removed! Do they take voters for fools?” Many unionists will agree. Allister’s party is polling at a respectable 8 per cent. But the DUP is counting on exhaustion, not foolishness. Most unionists would prefer to move on from Brexit, whatever their view of the boycott and the deal. Few people directly encounter the sea border checks and paperwork that remain, even if everyone ends up paying for them through higher prices and reduced choice. Almost nobody wants another Stormont collapse. A DUP leader who promises to keep chipping away at Brexit frictions without causing instability is offering unionist voters something they want to believe. Contrition over past exaggerations makes him easier to believe. Donaldson oversold the deal as much to get his divided party over the line as to persuade the unionist electorate. Now the DUP has settled back into Stormont, the hard sell is no longer required. The other major announcement in Wednesday’s speech was the DUP’s unilateral withdrawal from two constituencies, North Down and Fermanagh & South Tyrone, giving its endorsement to other unionist candidates. The DUP’s traditional idea of unionist electoral co-operation is for everyone else to get out of its way. The beneficiary in North Down is independent Alex Easton, who quit the DUP in 2021 in protest at Donaldson becoming leader. Easton’s objection was more factional than personal: it cannot be presumed he will return now Donaldson is gone. The DUP is voluntarily helping a defector from its ranks. The beneficiary in Fermanagh & South Tyrone is the UUP candidate Diana Armstrong. Although the DUP has stood aside for the UUP in this constituency before, there had been escalating rancour in recent weeks. Robinson and Allister had proposed a non-party joint candidate, which the UUP had rejected. Sharp exchanges between the DUP, UUP and TUV continued right up until Robinson suddenly surrendered. “In the interests of working collectively to secure pro-union members of parliament we want to lead by example … as the leaders of unionism,” he said. Robinson knows his party will be blamed for the narrative disaster that unionism faces in July’s Westminster election. There are already fewer unionist than nationalist MPs. Sinn Fein could surpass the DUP as the largest party and the total nationalist vote could surpass the total unionist vote, as both occurred in the 2022 Stormont election. Either of these outcomes, but the latter especially, would establish a trajectory of irrevocable unionist decline, all traced back to mistakes under the DUP’s watch. Any chance to head this off must be taken, even if it means granting de facto pacts to unionist rivals with no offers in return. Donaldson had been thinking the same way. In February he revealed there had been talks with the UUP on “building a more cohesive unionism”. He spoke of the DUP and the UUP working more closely together to increase unionist votes and seats under different contexts. Pacts can make sense for first-past-the-post Westminster elections, yet be counterproductive under proportional representation for Stormont and councils. Donaldson thought this co-operation “may lead to a realignment within unionism”, a swapping of factions, “where perhaps you have some more traditional elements and then a unionism that is forward-looking and wants to set out the vision for the union that wins converts … particularly people in the middle ground”. There is no doubt he imagined his relatively liberal wing of the DUP leading this forward-looking force. Robinson was Donaldson’s deputy leader, a loyal member of the liberal wing. The hope he offers the party is to be able to keep it on the course Donaldson set, while correcting some of his predecessor’s mistakes. Load-Date: June 1, 2024  End of Document
