   How Kidderminster Footwear weathered Brexit Shoe Intelligence March 5, 2024  Copyright 2024 EDM Publications GmbH All Rights Reserved  Section: Retail & Distribution; Main navigation; Topics; Vol. 26; Issue 5-6 Length: 652 words Body   Like other British exporters, Kidderminster Footwear suffered the double-whammy of the Covid-19 pandemic, which broke out in Europe in the latter part of the first quarter of 2020, and the UK’s departure from the European Union on Jan. 1, 2021, the so-called Brexit. The company states that its business, excluding the EU, is back to pre-Covid levels, while the share of the EU has dropped to 3 percent of total revenues from about a quarter before Brexit. Exports to non-EU countries represent about 55 percent of total revenues and the UK the remainder.  “Brexit separated us from the EU. We lost a lot of EU clients due to duty and the difficulty of moving goods” from the UK to continental Europe, explains John Drysdale, key account manager of the British wholesaler and retailer. Following the departure from Europe’s single market, footwear exports from the UK to the EU are now taxed 16.9 percent and require additional paperwork. The company mainly lost small EU accounts that were supplied from its warehouses in the UK, while large accounts continue to be supplied directly from the footwear manufacturers. Kidderminster Footwear has its collections produced mainly in Asia (China, Vietnam, Indonesia and Bangladesh) but also in countries such as Brazil and Romania. The company achieves about 60 percent of its business through wholesaling and made-to-order collections for private labels and the remaining 40 percent through retailing, thanks to 13 stores in England, many of which are close to its headquarters in Kidderminster, in the county of Worcestershire, and through e-commerce. “In 2024, we aren’t seeking to expand in the EU,” notes Drysdale, pointing out that small EU clients are not showing interest in resuming imports from the UK because of the constraints caused by Brexit. The cause of the severance of the relationship between British exporters and their EU clients is “more due to the confusion caused by Brexit rather than the cost,” he points out. “We are hoping for the rules to be relaxed” to push for greater exports to the EU, he added. Online is prevalent in retailing Kidderminster Footwear was established in 1865, initially in Northampton, formerly a significant cluster for the manufacturing of footwear, and has always been owned by the Blunt family. The company operates two warehouses, located in the English West Midlands. The main distribution center is a 200,000-square-foot facility in the town of Kidderminster, south of the city of Birmingham, while a secondary site is situated in Stafford, north of Birmingham. Because of a shift towards e-commerce, Kidderminster Footwear has been streamlining its network of stores, which operates only in the UK under the banners Blunts Shoes and United Footwear and generates about 40 percent of the retail revenues, against 60 percent for online. E-commerce has enabled the company to increase its reach and to retail overseas. Kidderminster Footwear has adapted its main warehouse to serve the online business by creating a separate area from the wholesaling activity. Several million pairs are available from stock at any one time, covering a wide range of categories. With the disruption of the supply chain caused by Covid-19, “a lot of retailers bought from us because of the high level of stock we had available,” highlights Drysdale. The company has a portfolio of house brands – including Spot On, Anne Michelle, Down to Earth and Thomas Blunt – that are sold through its own stores and third parties. The Blunts Shoes network also offers other brands, such as Clarks, Skechers, Hush Puppies, Gabor and Merrell. The company claims that, thanks to its large client base, it can identify market trends and advise its clients on which products are best adapted to their region. The company noted that there is growing demand for wide fittings, which requires investing into lasts. A last can cost from £15,000 to £30,000. Load-Date: August 8, 2024  End of Document
