   I'm worried that SNP has backed off from indy Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 17, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 626 words Byline: CHRIS McCALL Body   BY CHRIS McCALL HOLLYWOOD star Brian Cox has hit out at the SNP, claiming the party has "backed off" from Scottish independence during the general election campaign. The Succession actor said it was "something that worries me" as the party prepares to launch its manifesto this week. John Swinney has previously insisted independence will be mentioned on "page one, line one" of the policy plan. Dundonian Cox - who achieved global fame playing business mogul Logan Roy - is a long-term supporter of Scotland leaving the Union and is also a fierce critic of Brexit. The star, 78, used a BBC interview yesterday to claim the decision to leave the European Union and the economic consequences was "this demon we don't talk about". But he also raised fears the SNP could water down their commitment to delivering their No1 objective. Asked if he was looking forward to the launch of the SNP's manifesto, Cox said: "I'm not quite sure what's going to happen… as Plaid Cymru have done, it could be backing away from the notion of independence." Asked if he thought the party had backed off, he added: "They have backed off. I don't know if Scotland (has) backed off but I think that it's something that worries me, because I still believe in independence." We voted to stay Europe and we lost out BRIAN COX ON REFERENDUM Cox, whose main home is now New York, added: "I do believe in independence but I don't believe we shouldn't be part of these islands. I do believe we need a new kind of system. "I don't believe in a United Kingdom, I believe we should have a sort of united federation of these islands, where each country should be independent but come together, instead of things being dictated, as we find in Scotland, on our behalf. "The fact is we voted 62 per cent to stay in Europe, and we lost out completely, so we had no voice there." Cox also blamed Brexit for the decline in services. He said: "My main thing is there's still this demon we don't talk about, which is Brexit and why we are so broke." He pointed to research which suggested the UK economy had grown five per cent less since the Brexit vote. He added: "It seems to me that we are still suffering from that, and we've not done anything about it. So when we talk about other things, we can't really talk about where we are, as we are suffering from Brexit." He called the other manifestos the "same old, same old" and added: "My feeling is just we need to get rid of the present government. That's the most important thing as far as I'm concerned. "I'm not getting a sense of what's what and who's who; I'm getting a sense of who's against… but I'm not getting enough of where we're supposed to be going, particularly in relationship to poverty, particularly in relationship to the care of the working class, and I feel the working class (has been) a systematic sidestep for a very, very long time." It comes as Tony Blair said devolution kept Scotland in the UK. He was PM when legislation was passed to establish the Scottish Parliament after a referendum in 1997. He said: "I do reflect on devolution a lot, and occasionally do think what should we or could we have done differently. "But, on the whole, I'm still of the same opinion as I was back then - which is that devolution had to happen, otherwise you'd leave Scottish people with the choice of status quo or independence. And Scotland is still part of the UK, which was part of the design - so devolution has worked, as far as I am concerned." An SNP spokesman said: "As the largest political party - and proindependence party - in Scotland, the SNP will continue delivering for people across the country and making the case for a better Scotland with independence." We voted to stay in Europe and we lost out BRIAN COX ON BREXIT REFERENDUM RESULT Graphic    FEARS Cox, right, and with Manchester Mayor Andy Burnham & ex-Tory MP Nadine DorriesBY not VISIT Swinney, above, with activists on Keith and Dufftown heritage railway the being Banff Load-Date: June 17, 2024  End of Document
