   I'M NOT MAKING PLANS WITH NIGEL; ELECTION 2024 PM TURNS DOWN WN FARAGE REFORM DEAL BID lFARAGE TELLS PM: MAKE ME AN OFFER lBUT RISHI INSISTS THERE'S NO CHANCE The Sun (England) May 30, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, Northern Ireland  Copyright 2024 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD All Rights Reserved  Section: SPORT; Pg. 4,5 Length: 932 words Byline: HARRY COLE; NOA HOFFMAN Body   PM RISHI Sunak has said "No deal" to Nigel Farage - after the Brexit mischiefmaker opened the door to a peace agreement. The Reform UK President had hinted he could back away from his goal of wiping out the Tories at the General Election, if the Prime Minister agreed to talks. But responding to Mr Farage's challenge - made exclusively on The Sun's Never Mind the Ballots online show - Mr Sunak last night said no. Ex-PM Boris Johnson cut a deal with Nigel in 2019 to ensure the Brexit Party stepped back from standing in Tory-held seats. The move came before a Conservative landslide. However, so far in this campaign, Reform has insisted there would be no such deal. Mr Farage told The Sun the Tories deserved to be wiped out for "betraying" voters on immigration and on Brexit. But yesterday morning, he also suggested there was room for a deal, saying to Rishi: "Give me something back - we might have a conversation." There was speculation Mr Farage could demand Britain quit the European Court of Human Rights as the price of a deal. The Brexit stalwart said he had done the party many "favours" over the years - asking the PM: "What are they going to do back for me?" Experts say Reform - which currently polls in the low teens - could hand scores of seats to Labour, by robbing the Tories of desperately needed votes. But quizzed on a campaign stop in Devon, Mr Sunak - who bought breakfast for the travelling media - told The Sun that it was a hard "No" from him to any peace accord with Reform. Ribbing Mr Farage, the PM said: "There's only one or two people who's going to be Prime Minister on July 5. It's either Keir Starmer or me. So that's the choice for everyone in this election." And he added: "A vote for anyone who isn't the Conservative candidate is a vote to put Keir Starmer into No10." Earlier yesterday, Mr Farage revealed the Tories had tried to lure him away from campaigning against them - hinting they had even offered him a peerage. But asked what could make him stand down from his pledge to wipe out the Tories, he added: "I got rid of Theresa May with the Brexit Party. I stood aside for Boris to help him win a massive majority. "What are they going to do back for me?" He went on: "I've done them some huge favours over the years as a party. Give me something back. We might have a conversation." But he also warned the Government's "betrayal" on borders and immigration will cost the Tories the election. He said five years of the Conservatives not doing "a darn thing" meant some Leave voters "hate" the PM's party "and they're not gonna vote for it". He told our Never Mind the Ballots daily election show that three successive Tory manifestos had pledged to keep net migration in the tens of thousands a year - and in 2019 the party promised to "honour the Brexit vote". Mr Farage said: "The betrayal, the lies from the Conservative Party at every election since 2010 on legal immigration, are just astonishing. "Net migration is three-quarters of a million a year. "I'm sorry, this is betrayal, and that's how I feel about it." The Brexit frontman said some Leave voters would be put off backing Mr Sunak over the record figures. He said: "Those people hate your party, and they're not gonna vote for it, and I have to say, I don't blame them." Mr Farage also claimed the Government had failed to put enough distance between Britain and Brussels, meaning Sir Keir Starmer's Labour could undo parts Brexit if it wins. He said: "Starmer would find it very difficult to drag us back to the Single Market position if the Conservatives had taken us away from it. We haven't done a darn thing over the course of the last five years. "We haven't deregulated, we haven't moved away, and it's an absolute tragedy that it's now so easy for a Labour government to pull us closer." But former Tory leader Sir Iain Duncan Smith insisted that voting for Reform would "destroy" everything Brexiteers believed in because it would hand Sir Keir the keys to No10. And Sir Iain said parts of Whitehall, including the Treasury, supported higher levels of net migration. The staunch Brexiteer's own seat, Chingford, in North East London, is at risk of swinging to Labour if Reform attracts enough disaffected Tory voters. He contested: "The whole idea is to get legal and illegal migration down and get rid of illegal migration. "The problem has always been the Treasury and others like the idea of migration. "My point is, if Reform ends up standing in all the seats, they will end up delivering exactly what they don't want." Mr Farage has previously fended off Conservative criticism that a vote for his party would only boost Labour. At a speech in Dover on Tuesday, he said: "Given that Labour are going to win, why not vote for something you actually believe in." Last night, the PM again ruled out going head-to-head with Mr Farage in a TV debate. Instead, he will square up to Sir Keir in their first live TV debate next Tuesday. The hour-long showdown between the Prime Minister and the Labour leader will air on ITV at 9pm. Veteran debate host, journalist Julie Etchingham, will moderate the live clash in front of a studio audience. ITV current affairs boss Michael Jermey said: "Millions of viewers value the election debates. "They provide a chance to see and hear the party leaders set out their pitch to the country. "The leaders will debate directly with each other and take questions from voters." Both Sir Keir and Mr Sunak have been invited to a similar clash on The Sun's Never Mind the Ballots show. So far, only the Prime Minister has agreed to take part in the head-to-head. harry.cole@thesun.co.uk Graphic    Breakfast ... PM Rishi yesterday and right, Farage on Sun's showOn point ... Nigel and our Harry Load-Date: May 30, 2024  End of Document
