   I'm A Celeb's Fred Sirieix launches scathing attack on campmate Nigel Farage as he relaunches his career before getting covered in milkshake: 'He was good at washing dishes but not politics!' MailOnline June 4, 2024 Tuesday 7:23 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: SHOWBIZ; Version:1 Length: 748 words Byline: Connie Rusk For Mailonline Body   Fred Sirieix has hit out at his I'm A Celebrity campmate Nigel Farage after the politician relaunched his career.  Fresh off the wave of placing third in the ITV reality show last year, the former UKIP leader, 60, has kickstarted his bid to become an MP.  But his election campaign didn't quite go to plan as the new Reform leader was drenched by a woman while being mobbed by crowds in Clacton-on-Sea while leaving Wetherspoons.  Wading in on Nigel's career bid, Fred, who also starred on last year's series, wrote on X: 'I spoke at length and extensively with Nigel Farage for 3 weeks while in the jungle. I wanted to make my own mind up about him and his views. Conclusion is simple. 'He was very good at washing the dishes in the river but when it comes to politics he has no plan and no substance.  'No vision. No concrete policies. He is not interested in making the UK / the world a better place. He just rants.'  Nigel and Fred famously clashed during their time in the jungle, with the hotelier once blasting the politician was 'talking b******s' as they cooked.  They also clashed during a heated debate about Brexit within days of entering the camp. Politician Nigel was the leader of the UK Independence Party from 2006 to 2009 and 2010 to 2016, and leader of the Brexit Party from 2019 to 2021, with a referendum on Brexit being held in 2016. A number of Fred's followers waded in on the row.  One wrote: 'Farage is very good at pointing out what he feels is wrong but is often found completely wanting when it comes to detailed, practical plans to address those same issues'. While others said: 'Enlighten us. He seems to have better ideas than Starmer who's had years to perfect his flip flop policies.' 'Perfect CV for a politician then, just as qualified as the 650 we've already got.'  'Same as every other politician, then?'  On Tuesday, Nigel was dramatically splattered with milkshake as he kicked off his bid to become an MP.  Essex Police said later that a 25-year-old woman had been arrested on suspicion of assault, along with a man who seemingly intervened while she was being detained. The new Reform leader was flanked as usual by burly security as he left the local Wetherspoons pub, but they could do nothing as the woman flung the contents of a McDonald's cup towards him.  It caught him full in the face, although he merely wiped his eyes and continued. Home Secretary James Cleverly led condemnation of the attack, saying it was 'unacceptable' against any politician. Reform allies branded the assailant a 'juvenile moron' and said it would only boost their support. But Nigel himself laughed the episode off, buying a round of milkshakes for photographers and posting a video saying: 'My milkshake brings all the people to the rally.'  It came after the Brexit champion told a huge crowd of local voters the Tories had 'betrayed' their trust and warned Rishi Sunak would pay a 'big price' at the general election on 4 July. Shouts from the crowd included 'get 'em Nige' and 'we love you Nigel' as huge numbers of Farage's supporters gathered near Clacton pier. Nigel's campaign launch in the Essex seat came after he yesterday performed a stunning U-turn on his previous decision not to stand for Parliament.  The 60-year-old has made a dramatic return to the political frontline and also been installed as Reform UK leader in place of Richard Tice. Nigel's campaign in Clacton - a constituency once held by UKIP when he was the party's leader - will be his eighth attempt to enter Westminster. He will need to overturn a 31,000 Conservative majority from the last election with only minor boundary changes in the seat. However, Tories have been sounding gloomy about their prospects and pollsters believe Nigel is in with a strong chance. Grumbling has been surfacing about Rishi Sunak's failure to head off the threat of Nigel standing, with suggestions he should have been given a peerage before. The developments have heaped more pressure on Rishi ahead of a head-to-head debate tonight where he is seen as having to land blows on Keir Starmer. More polls today have shown Labour on track for a massive landslide on July 4.  As he launched his campaign at the Moon and Starfish , Nigel made reference to the town's past support for UKIP when it elected Tory defector Douglas Carswell as the local MP. He said: 'Without Clacton, Brexit would not have happened - so thank you Clacton!' Nigel vowed to be a 'bloody nuisance' in the House of Commons should he be elected in a month's time. Load-Date: June 4, 2024  End of Document
