   In first 'Red Wall' seat to turn blue, voters no longer believe in change i-news June 21, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 10 Length: 2105 words Byline: Patrick Cockburn Body   At 11.32pm on 12 December 2019, the Labour-held constituency of Blyth Valley gained national fame when it narrowly voted in the general election for a Conservative MP for the first time. As the first brick of the "Red Wall" to fall that night, the result was celebrated as a famous victory for Boris Johnson's populist "levelling-up" version of Conservatism. The shock was greater because Blyth, a former coal-mining and shipbuilding area 14 miles north of Newcastle on the Northumbrian coast, was a stronghold of organised labour and the Labour Party. As a similar pattern repeated itself across the North, pundits speculated about how far English politics was turning permanently upsidedown, with part of the white working class turning to the populist right. This switch in allegiances will almost certainly be reversed on 4 July, but the reasons it happened are not going away. Asked why Labour was routed four-and-a-halfyears ago, Ian Lavery, a veteran MP and trade union leader who is now the Labour candidate for Blyth and Ashington, says: "Brexit was the cause. It is that simple. People were taken in by Boris Johnson's promises that he was a huge friend of the working class. They felt their lives were shit, so they believed him." Backing for Brexit in Blyth and elsewhere in the North East was a symptom of a deeper anger at being poor, left behind and ignored while nothing in their lives improved. Lavery, a former leader of the National Union of Mineworkers and chair of the Labour Party, says that few talk of Brexit today and Leave voters tell him they regret the choice they made. But they also do not relish the choice they must make in the general election. "People are desperate for change" but they are apathetic because they do not believe they will get it. Other parts of the UK complain of the surge in the cost of living since the Covid-19 pandemic and the Ukraine war, but Lavery says that in Blyth "we have had a cost of living crisis for generations with life expectancy 10 per cent lower and child poverty 40 per cent higher than in the rest of the country". "Deaths of despair," the collective term used for self-destructive deaths caused by alcohol, drugs and suicide, are far higher in the North than the South, says John Tomaney, Professor of Urban and Regional Planning at University College London. Out of 20 local authority areas where such deaths are most prevalent, 16 are in the North. Among 25- to 29-year-olds, more than two in five (41.1 per cent) of all deaths are in the "deaths of despair" category. The north-south divide is stark: suicide is the strongest evidence of extreme unhappiness and the rate in the North East is twice that of London. "White working-class communities, which used to work in coal-mining and ship-building, have lost the narrative of their lives," says Tomaney. On the eve of the election, the mood in the North East is described by local observers as "fatalistic" or "apathetic". They predict a Labour landslide, but a low turnout. Alex Snowdon, a teacher and political activist who is intending to vote Labour, says that the best word to describe pre-election attitudes in the region is not "apathy" but "resignation". "People hate the political Establishment, but this is mixed with a sense of resignation that nothing much will change," he says. Sceptical at the beginning of the campaign about a Tory wipeout, he suspects that Rishi Sunak's D-Day debacle may have tipped the outcome toward a historic collapse. He says that even where he lives in Hexham, a large rural constituency that the Conservatives have held since 1924, there is a chance they may lose the seat. For a man most likely to be re-elected with a large majority, Lavery is strikingly gloomy. I interviewed him a few miles north of Blyth in Wansbeck in an office that he said was a 100 yards from what had once been the largest coal mine in Europe, employing 5,000 miners, while these days most jobs available locally were insecure and paid the minimum wage. Describing himself as "an unabashed leftie, an industrial militant", he feels "fairly isolated" in the House of Commons. "I am not an accountant or a lawyer and have never managed a hedge fund," he says. "I am one of the few there who has ever had dirt on his hands and claimed the dole. I once worked in a mine stretching seven miles out under the North Sea." Revealingly, the Conservative MP, Ian Levy, who was elected for Blyth Valley four-and-a-halfyears ago, does not differ much from Lavery about what is wrong in Blyth and de-industrialised southeast Northumberland. Proportion deaths of come 'deaths A nursing assistant who worked in a mental hospital for 28 years before his election, Levy says that he won last time because of "a perfect storm [working in his favour]: Brexit, Corbyn, the sitting MP standing down." His old constituency has disappeared because of boundary changes with 55 per cent of it in Cramlington and Killingworth, where he is the candidate. His wife, Maureen (inset), is standing for Blyth and Ashington, which includes 45 per cent of the old constituency. They are cheerfully pessimistic about their chances: "If we don't get in, we can still say we worked our socks off to improve the lives of the people of Blyth Valley," says Levy. "We always knew we might have only one go at it," adds Maureen, saying how they had done their best to end "decades of neglect". of all the North which under the despair' Levy enjoyed enhanced leverage as an MP because of Blyth's status as a high-profile Conservative electoral trophy, enabling him to pressure the UK Government into giving substance to its "levelling up" rhetoric. Joshua Clark, an aide of Levy, drove me around Blyth, proudly showing off governmentfunded projects worth £400m. Most significant of these is the Northumberland Line, a railway reconnecting Blyth with Newcastle for the first time since the Beeching cuts more than half-a-century ago. It is soon to reopen with two reconstructed stations. Building sites are dotted around Blyth, such as an Energy Central Learning Hub (£14m) and the Blyth Market Place Culture Hub (£15m). By way of contrast, a far more ambitious plan by Britishvolt to build a £3.8bn electric vehicle battery plant, employing 3,000 workers directly and 5,000 indirectly, rapidly foundered. The project was approved in 2020 as a prime example of "levelling up" and a £100m Government subsidy was later announced. But the company collapsed in 2023, leading to the project being scrapped. In Blyth and other Red Wall marginals, the Conservatives are accused of practising old-fashioned "pork barrel" politics, using state handouts to win votes. But the long-neglected people living on this stretch of the Northumberland coast may feel that they deserve the state handouts they can get. Blyth has benefited from its visibility as the poster child of "levelling up", though critics say this largely remained a slogan, a scatter-gun approach that never developed into a coherent redevelopment policy. Disparities in standards of living in the UK have deepened not only between north and south, but within regions and districts. A baby girl born in the Cowpen district in Blyth will have a life expectancy 16.6 years less than a baby girl born five miles to the south in Cramlington North, according to the Office for National Statistics. Newcastle is one of the most attractive cities in the UK, with its 19th-century buildings and gleaming 20th century universities. But, as in Birmingham and Cardiff, the look of affluent and innovative modernity is misleading since it generally does not extend far beyond the city centre. This can often feel like a Potemkin Village, pictured on all the tourist brochures but atypical of the streets where most of the 829,000 population of metropolitan Newcastle live, and where the cost of living crisis and the legacy of Covid-19 continues to bite deep. In Heaton, a prosperous-looking district two miles east of Newcastle city centre, this affluence is under pressure, though the place is listed by one newspaper as among the best districts to live in the UK. David Tubby, senior minister at Heaton Baptist Church, says "we can see hugely more people coming to our food bank. The number needing help goes up every week and never comes down, thanks to the rise in the cost of living". He says the pandemic was a trauma for people which still affects them. He conducted funerals during lockdown when he had to choose six of his congregation to attend, instead of the 350 mourners who wanted to come. He believes this explains why there is such lasting popular anger over "Partygate". He sees an increase in poverty even among those in work: "A few days ago, a woman came to the church to get help to buy baby milk because she did not get paid until the end of the month." Housing prices may be lower than further south, but this does not mean that they are affordable. In Wallsend, a few miles to the east of Newcastle, Edward Hodgson, 27, is a teacher living with his parents who wants to buy a one-bedroom place to live which will cost him at least £130,000, but this price is beyond him. Even with a large deposit, he reckons his mortgage will cost him £600 a month, which, with essential bills, would leave him with nothing to live on. He thinks the Conservatives have broken "the social contract, under which, if you worked hard, you could buy your own home and raise a family". Instead, "the disconnect between wages and house prices is the worst it has ever been". The decline of the North East compared with London and the South East dates back to the years after the Second World War, accelerating under Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s and during austerity in the 2010s. Attempts to reverse the trend have failed, but one policy has had a measure of success. Large investments were made in promoting the resurgence of city centres, in the belief that they would reinvigorate the wider urban area and the surrounding region. "City centrism" worked to a real, though limited, degree as a formula for driving economic growth, but it turned out to have a dangerous weakness. High-quality education institutions are a core ingredient of these new city centres. Newcastle University has 28,000 students and 3,000 staff and Northumbria University has 37,000 students and 1,600 staff. Among the biggest employers in the city, the universities attract students from all over the UK and the world. But the UK university sector is engulfed in a crisis. Chris Day, vicechancellor of Newcastle University and chair of the Russell Group of 24 top UK universities, says the sector faces financial dangers, which may prove terminal for some weaker institutions. The cause of the problem is simple: tuition fees paid by UK students have been frozen since 2012, forcing universities to rely on higher fees paid by non-UK students, a majority of whom come from China, India and Nigeria. "Newcastle University is no different from the others," says Day. "We lose £3,000 on every home student and we cross subsidise from foreign students." He says that 67 per cent of Newcastle's students are from the UK, but the figure for University College London is 50 per cent and 30 per cent for LSE. COCKBURN HENRY In other words, the financial future of UK universities is vulnerable to developments over which they have no control, notably the unpredictable zig-zags of government visa and immigration policy. The crucial flow of Chinese students could be interrupted by a deterioration in already fraught UK-China relations. Applications from Nigeria have been hit by a downturn in the country's economy. "Many universities could wobble," says Day, though the prestigious Newcastle University is more robust than many. The most alarming feature of the long-festering problems facing the North East is that there are so many of them and they cross infect each other, dragging down the region. A Labour government will lack resources to do much about this. Tomaney views the Brexit vote as "a cry of despair", but Boris Johnson's triumphant populism of 2019 is discredited. Yet the desperation that fuelled these political upheavals will still be there after a Labour landslide. In "left-behind Britain", a political vacuum continues to exist that others, promising long-deprived people radical change for the better, may seek to fill in coming years. The number needing help goes up every week and never comes down, thanks to the cost of living People were taken in by Boris Johnson's promises that he was a huge friend of the working class 41% Proportion of all deaths in the North of England which come under the 'deaths of despair' category Load-Date: June 21, 2024  End of Document
