   Ireland 'reaping what it has sown' with migrant influx The Daily Telegraph (London) April 27, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 4 Length: 342 words Byline: James Crisp Body   THE influx of migrants crossing into Ireland from the UK is because Dublin is "reaping what it sowed" in the Brexit negotiations, a senior unionist has said. Micheál Martin, Ireland's deputy prime minister, has blamed the Rwanda plan for an increase in asylum seekers entering his country from Northern Ireland. Dublin believes that more than 80 per cent of asylum seekers in Ireland have crossed the open border. However, Jim Allister, the leader of the Traditional Unionist Voice party, said it was not the Rwanda plan but Ireland's insistence on keeping the border open after Brexit that was to blame. "You reap what you sow. The Republic of Ireland insisted there wouldn't even be a camera allowed on the international frontier and now they lament the consequences of the open border they demanded," he said. "It's hard to find sympathy for those so driven by their all-Ireland agenda and poking the British over Brexit that they insisted on the very thing now swamping them with immigrants." Downing Street said it was too early to jump to conclusions about the deterrent impact of the Rwanda scheme. A No 10 spokesman said: "The Act serves as a deterrent and that is why we are working to get flights off the ground. Our partnership is precisely the kind of collaborative effort that is required to tackle people smuggling." Tensions over immigration have risen in Ireland amid an increase in migrant numbers and a housing crisis. Mr Allister opposes Rishi Sunak's Brexit deal for Northern Ireland, which he says puts its place in the UK at risk. The Windsor Framework kept the land border with the Republic of Ireland open after Brexit but at the price of introducing an Irish Sea border between Britain and Northern Ireland. Dublin and Brussels insisted on the deal to prevent a post-Brexit hard land border on the island of Ireland, in the negotiations to take the UK out of the EU. Ireland said the return of border infrastructure would put the peace process at risk and that a Brexit treaty was necessary to protect its place in the EU's Single Market. Load-Date: April 27, 2024  End of Document
