   Khan cites £140bn Brexit blow in call for honest debate on EU; Mayor's plea Financial Times (London, England) January 12, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 The Financial Times Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2 Length: 658 words Byline: JIM PICKARD ;PETER FOSTER Body   London mayor Sadiq Khan was to declare "Brexit isn't working" last night, on the basis of research suggesting the economy is £140bn smaller than it would have been if Britain had remained in the EU. Independent analysis from Cambridge Econometrics, commissioned by City Hall, suggests the output of the economy is 6 per cent smaller than it would have been with continued membership of the customs union and single market. The consultancy's estimate that economic output is £140bn lower as a result of Brexit - £2.2tn compared with £2.34tn - was based on economic modelling of a "counterfactual UK" that had not voted to leave the bloc. It also calculates that the UK has 1.8mn fewer jobs - a drop of 4.8 per cent - than it would otherwise have had. In a speech at Mansion House, Labour's Khan planned to make the case for a more open debate about the downsides of leaving the EU and the potential merits of rejoining the single market. "Rather than politicians dodging or ducking this issue, it's incumbent on all of us to have an honest and mature discussion about the best way forward," he was to say, "because the hardline version of Brexit we've ended up with is dragging our economy down and pushing up the cost of living." The intervention is awkward for Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer, who opposed Brexit but has now pledged to make it work as he seeks to woo voters who rejected the party over the issue. Starmer has ruled out rejoining the single market or customs union but has insisted that he can forge a "much better" deal for the UK. Khan says his demand for a "closer relationship with the EU" is broadly in line with the Labour leadership. But by calling for a pragmatic debate about the benefits of rejoining the customs union and single market, he will go much further than Starmer. London was one of the most Europhile parts of the country with 60 per cent of its inhabitants voting Remain in the 2016 referendum. Cambridge Econometrics estimates that the city's economy is £30bn smaller than it would have been if the UK had stayed in the EU, with 290,000 fewer jobs. The consultancy also suggests that the average Briton is nearly £2,000 worse off, while the typical Londoner is £3,400 worse off because of Brexit. The Cambridge report claims the economic damage will continue, with real Gross Value Added - a measure of economic output - about £311bn lower by 2035 (10.1 per cent) than it would otherwise have been. Last November the National Institute of Economic and Social Research estimated the negative impact of Brexit at 5-6 per cent of gross domestic product by 2035. The Cambridge report estimates the hit to GDP at 10 per cent. The Cambridge analysis finds that London's economy will be relatively more resilient to the impact of Brexit than the rest of the UK. Output growth will be stronger than in the country as a whole while employment is predicted to increase at similar rates, implying that productivity growth would be stronger in the capital. Sophie Hale, principal economist at the Resolution Foundation think-tank, said London's superior economic performance was because of the capital's concentration of services companies, which had proved more resilient to post- Brexit trade barriers. "This shows we need to do more to protect goods such as advanced manufacturing from the Brexit trade shock," she added. The Office for Budget Responsibility, the government's fiscal watchdog, issued a report last year suggesting Brexit would cut long-term productivity by 4 per cent. The OBR also estimated both exports and imports would be about 15 per cent lower in the long term. The Treasury said: "The UK has grown faster than Germany since leaving the EU, and the IMF has said our mediumterm growth outlook is brighter than many of our neighbours on the continent, including France and Germany." 6% Estimated gap in economic output as a consequence of Brexit £2,000 The amount the research suggests the average Briton is worse off Load-Date: January 11, 2024  End of Document
