   Labour has so many troubles on its own doorstep that it may not have time for us Irish Independent May 24, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 22 Length: 1054 words Byline: MARTINA DEVLIN Body   Cometh the hour, cometh the man. Keir Starmer has a prime minister-in-waiting air, while Rishi Sunak conveys a goinggoing-gone www.impression.No sooner did the starting whistle blow on a UK general election than the dynamic shifted between the two leading contenders. Ireland has skin in the game. A change of government must turn the tide in favour of warmer Irish-British relations, at a low since Brexit and pockmarked during the lifetime of the outgoing administration by chaotic U-turns, bad faith and a brazen attitude to the law. Among the most memorable was former northern secretary Brandon Lewis's insistence that the government was only proposing to break international law over the Withdrawal Agreement "in a specific and limited way". As if that hardly counted. The next six weeks will brim with sound and fury, along with a surfeit of nastiness - the tiny but ambitious Reform UK party was out of the populist traps early, calling it "the immigration election". That party, founded by Nigel Farage, who isn't standing for election because he's too busy trying to inveigle his friend Donald Trump back in to the White House, is targeting Tory and Labour seats alike - especially those of MPs not hardline enough on migrants. This is Sunak's first general election as head of the Conservatives and Starmer's first as Labour leader. When the UK last had a general election, in December 2019, Queen Elizabeth was on the throne and Prince Harry and his wife Meghan were working members of the royal family. Stories about Brexit and the political turmoil it generated dominated the news cycle. Today, Charles is monarch, while the Sussexes live in California and do their own thing. Brexit is no longer headline news and is unlikely to loom large in the election campaign - the British public is Brexit-weary. However, party leaders can't entirely avoid it as a subject - it may not come up often on the doorsteps, but it will have to feature in leaders' debates, at least in passing. The odds are stacked in Starmer's favour to plant Labour's red flag on 10 Downing Street's roof, at least metaphorically. Not only is the electorate so very ready for a change after 14 years of Torydom, but the Conservatives are entering the campaign looking disunited. As for Sunak, his credibility has skidded for various reasons, among them his flagship and highly controversial Rwanda policy. Labour says it will not deport migrants to Africa, but will instead set up a new border force. As a consequence, a reduction is expected in numbers crossing our own Border, because asylum-seekers will no longer fear the so-called Rwanda solution. A Labour government is in Ireland's and Britain's best interests, but won't be a panacea for all ills. This isn't the beginning of the end for Brexit, because another referendum isn't on the horizon for several decades. However, a return to civility and co-operation between neighbours is anticipated, with Labour taking a constructive approach to post-Brexit arrangements. In addition, a reset in UK-EU relations is the least anyone can expect from a Starmer-led government. For the North, he has promised an end to the legacy legislation, unwinding some of the cross-community misery caused by this notorious measure. Hopes of Labour calling a border poll are premature - it's not party policy - but its position on the union is less rigid than the Tories'. Realistically, Labour has such a plethora of problems on the home front that it will have limited bandwidth left for Ireland. Unfortunately, Britain is in disarray. The world's sixth-biggest economy has been pounded by Brexit, the pandemic and energy and food price rises following Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Those Churchillian "sunlit uplands" cited by Boris Johnson didn't materialise. People are struggling to put food on the table, the health service is crumbling, social services are stretched to breaking point and train strikes are causing misery. Some honesty amid the election pitches would be helpful. Michael Heseltine - who served in Margaret Thatcher and John Major's cabinets, including as deputy prime minister to the latter - characterises this outing as the most "dishonest election campaign of modern times" and accuses both parties of deliberately avoiding the subject of Brexit. He told Sky News: "You can't have a discussion about the country's economy or its defence or immigration or the environment and not discuss Brexit. We have cast ourselves off from our principal market, our most important partners." Wouldn't it be instructive to hear a plain speaker like him debate on a public platform alongside Starmer, Sunak and other party leaders? Starmer promises change, says he will "stop the chaos" and maintains he can attract private investment deterred by the political upheaval of recent years. For Sunak, lagging 20 points behind in the polls, it's not a question of whether he will lose, but by how much. He timed his election announcement to coincide with improving inflation figures, but the economic outlook is weaker than he says and he can't claim victory on the immigration front. On the contrary, his Rwanda wheeze is dead in the water, as became clear earlier this month when a Northern Ireland high court judge ruled it could not be applied there. A general election means the North also goes to the polls. It doesn't affect Stormont, whose members are MLAs, but the DUP's position is weakened by charges of historical sex offences against former leader Jeffrey Donaldson, who will not contest the July 4 poll. The July 3 date set for a preliminary hearing to decide if he has a case to answer is an additional cross for his party to bear. Turnout may well be low among loyalist voters. Let's turn, finally, to The Great Gatsby, in which F Scott Fitzgerald describes Tom and Daisy as offhand people: they smashed up things, "retreated back into their money or their vast carelessness" and left it to other people to clean up the mess they made. It could double as a description for the recent Tory era. But British people appear to be impatient for their day of reckoning. 'The odds are stacked in Starmer's favour to plant Labour's red flag on No 10 roof. Not only is the electorate so very ready for a change after 14 years of Torydom, but the Conservatives are entering the campaign looking disunited' Graphic    British prime minister Rishi Sunak issues a statement outside 10 Downing Street after calling a general election for July 4. Photo: PA Load-Date: May 24, 2024  End of Document
