   Labour can rebuild UK's relationship with EU; New government must be realistic about state of mind in Brussels and European capitals and need to make concessions The Times (London) June 28, 2024 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 23 Length: 1054 words Byline: Anton Muscatelli Body   Although Brexit is not central to this election as it was in 2019, it does occasionally raise its head. Whilst the leaders' debates have primarily focused on other issues, most of the political parties give a nod to Europe in their manifestos. The problem is the UK political class seems focused on revisiting the debates of 2016: should we quickly rejoin the customs union or single market? Should we tweak the UKEU Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) to correct the mistakes we made in delivering a hard Brexit? In Scotland's case there are some in independencesupporting parties who propose we painlessly return to full membership. But all these perspectives fundamentally misunderstand the state of mind in Brussels and in European capitals. There is no burning desire to reopen the wounds of Brexit, especially since the attention of Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, and others remains focused on the geopolitical crises to the east and south. The EU has moved on from a painful divorce. Von der Leyen said in February that she "tends to forget" Brexit. This is not easy to write for passionate "Remainers" like me who fully understand, and frequently discuss, the economic costs of our actions. Brexit will continue to be a major drag on the UK economy for the foreseeable future. It has been an unconscionable act of economic selfharm. The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) estimates that the current trade relationship with the EU will reduce the UK's long-run productivity by 4 per cent relative to remaining in the EU, mainly due to additional non-tariff barriers. This is a massive setback for our public finances and standards of living. Post-Covid this act of economic vandalism has become even more significant. I would love nothing more than the UK to rejoin the EU tomorrow, but rather than playing "fantasy rejoin" and wishing that rather than Boris Johnson in 2019 we had hired a better divorce lawyer, we now need to realise UK-EU relations must be rebuilt from where we are now. So, what are the realistic prospects of a closer relationship with the EU? First, in any negotiation, we must better comprehend the issues the EU is facing. Yes, it is grappling with similar economic pressures to the UK, but it's also dealing with thorny issues on further enlargement in central and eastern Europe and a strong performance by far-right populist, anti-migrant and anti- Green deal parties in the European parliament elections. Coupled with a snap election in France called by President Macron, the UK is not a top priority for the EU. A crucial issue for Europe will be the wider geopolitical context and trade tensions with the US and China. Under the guise of industrial policies to promote economic recovery and reach net zero, the major trading blocks are raising trade barriers and causing a new trend: geoeconomic fragmentation. Depending on how extreme this fragmentation turns out to be, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Trade Organization (WTO) studies have estimated the potential costs of a severe decoupling of the world economy into different trade blocks as being between 2 to 6.4 per cent for the advanced economies. The EU's industrial policy in response to the US's Inflation Reduction Act has been through its Green Deal Industrial Plan and the Net-Zero Industry Act (NZIA). Passed in May, the NZIA loosens state aid rules - the EU regulations regarding allowable domestic subsidies - to cover more types of clean energy initiatives. Projects gaining strategic net-zero status under the NZIA will also enjoy support from the Strategic Technologies for Europe Platform which leverages existing EU funding programmes such as Horizon Europe and the Recovery and Resilience Facility. If, as seems likely, Labour wins the UK election and develops a new industrial policy around net zero and key critical technologies, it will need to understand how the UK risks becoming isolated in trade terms. If Labour wants to drive UK productivity growth it needs to ensure we can access the (EURO)14.5 trillion market on our doorstep. As EU legislation and regulation evolves, we are diverging from our European neighbours post-Brexit. A major task for the new government will be to stabilise relations with the EU, addressing and extending the time-limited aspects of the TCA, and keeping a close eye on how we voluntarily shadow EU regulations to avoid divergence. Second, Labour has declared its intent to enter in agreement with the EU to avoid unnecessary border checks and boost UK-EU agri-food trade. The UK in a Changing Europe think-tank has estimated this could significantly boost UK exports (by 22.5 per cent) especially helping SMEs, as well as EU imports. Third, whilst improvements of this type to the TCA are of course desirable for both sides, we need to understand what the EU's priorities might be and how we're equipped to meet these. With impeccable timing, the European Commission in April proposed a youth mobility programme that it hopes to put to a future UK government for negotiation. In economic terms this would be massively beneficial to the UK economy. Parties like the SNP and Lib Dems have recently advocated such closer EU ties, but both Conservatives and Labour have rejected it to date. In Scotland, following tough cuts to the higher education budget, could the SNP possibly favour the return to free tuition for EU citizens - which youth mobility requires - in this fiscal climate? However, the key point is this: if you are trying to build up a new relationship with the EU it's a twoway street. Brussels will demand some significant concessions, especially around mobility and market access. And these concessions are exactly what a new UK government will need to boost the economy and productivity. But the politics diverge from the economics on this point. Above all, a new UK government will need a major dose of realism, and willingness to compromise, as it negotiates with its EU partners. But if we approach our dialogue with the EU with openness and a genuine spirit of co-operation, who knows where it might lead. Professor Sir Anton Muscatelli is principal and vice-chancellor of the University of Glasgow A crucial issue will be trade tensions with the US and China Any new relationship with the EU has to be a two-way street Graphic    Ursula von der Leyen's attention is on crises to the east and south Load-Date: June 28, 2024  End of Document
