   Leaving EU a hit to economic growth South Wales Echo June 26, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 16,17 Length: 638 words Body   AS the general election campaign enters its final stages we can't help noticing some common themes across the political parties. All are offering better public services, more investment in infrastructure, and rescue schemes for the NHS. None are saying this can be done through taxation -indeed the largest parties are either ruling out tax increases or even promising tax cuts. So, how do they think the funding gap will be filled? Why, through "growth", of course. This election coincides with our public examination season, and students of A-level economics have been sitting in exam halls around the country writing essays about "growth". These young economists typically have more facts at their fingertips than can be found at this election time in most newspaper articles, social media posts, TV debates, radio phone-ins or podcasts. These students are very aware of the possible downsides of growth, such as environmental degradation, inflation and the replacement of human capital with artificial intelligence. Young people know the growth of incomes is often accompanied by the growth of inequality, with billionaires taking joyrides in space, while down here on earth their workforce, who actually create the income, rely on the growth of charitable food banks. Very few things in human society can be expected to grow forever, and an idea that growth can be a fairy-dust that balances our budget would be magical thinking. This is especially true for a country that has decided to cut off its trade arrangements with its nearest neighbours, who happen to belong to the world's largest single market. Any budding economist will be aware of an economic principle that has been known since Adam Smith put it forward in 1776: more trade means more income and more growth, therefore less trade means less income and less growth. We urge all political parties to start talking openly about the growth being destroyed before our very eyes by Brexit. The politically neutral Office for Budget Responsibility, along with several highly respected think tanks and international organisations, have laid bare the costs of Britain's non-membership of the EU. These include a 15% decline in Britain's international trade and an annual loss to Britain's growth rate of 4 to 6%. These figures are open to some debate, but bearing in mind that recent growth rates are estimated at less than 1%, and anything greater than 5% per annum would stand out against the general trend of 70 years or more, it is not surprising that polls show that public opinion in Britain now strongly recognises Brexit as having been a disaster. If we are depending on growth rates to free Britain from the mess it's in, we can't afford to lose a single percentage point. Every political party claims to be the friend of small business. Given that thousands of small businesses say they can no longer trade with the EU, politicians who refuse even to discuss the consequences of Brexit. are false friends. An incoming government wanting to use small and medium sized enterprises as engines of growth must recognise that scaling up requires no less than full and free access to the 500 million customers who are our closest neighbours. None of this year's A-level candidates took part in the 2016 referendum; indeed no person born in the 21st century voted for Brexit, and if any new government wishes to keep its promises to them, and to their elders, there is only one logical course of action: Britain must rejoin the European Single Market and customs union as a matter of urgency, and rejoin the EU itself in due course. Silence about the costs of Brexit. is unpatriotic, a dereliction of duty. It lets down future generations and just muttering something about closer alignment simply will not do. Padraig O'Brien Dr Charles Smith Joint Chairs, Wales for Europe Load-Date: June 26, 2024  End of Document
