   Macron: Brexit failed to solve immigration; French president calls European nationalists 'hidden Brexiteers' who gloss over risks of leaving The Daily Telegraph (London) May 3, 2024 Friday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 575 words Byline: Henry Samuel Body   BREXIT has "impoverished" the UK and failed to solve the country's immigration problems, Emmanuel Macron has said. The French president also took aim at European nationalists ahead of the bloc's elections next month, saying they were all "hidden Brexiteers". "Brexit has impoverished the United Kingdom," he told The Economist. "Brexit has done nothing to solve immigration in the UK. Well, despite that, some people think it doesn't look so bad. But nobody dares to say that anything is wrong. And so nobody is taking responsibility for anything." The French president also accused Europe's nationalists of "distorting the European debate" and glossing over the risks of leaving. He said: "I say to Europeans: Wake up. Wake up. They are hidden Brexiteers. All European nationalists are hidden Brexiteers. It's all the same lies. "Make no mistake. If you entrust the keys to people who think like they do, there is no reason why Europe should become a great power. In a way, it's as if we were saying it's not a problem if we entrust the bank to robbers. When they are around the table, they take Europe hostage." A spokesman for Rishi Sunak, the Prime Minister, hit back at Mr Macron's claims about Brexit, saying: "Clearly, as a long-time Brexiteer, he [Mr Sunak] would not agree. We left the EU to get control of our borders and in doing so that's how we're leading the pack with our partnership to break the model of the criminal gangs. "In terms of the economy, I point you to our track record. Britain is now the fourth largest exporter globally, overtaking France." Mr Macron's comments came as his centrist Renaissance party faces being trounced by Marine Le Pen's National Rally (RN) in the upcoming European Parliament elections on June 9. The end can be "brutal", he told The Economist, adding: "Things can happen much more quickly than we think." Mr Macron suffered a political setback yesterday after France's broadcast watchdog Arcom ruled that the twohour-long speech he made at the Sorbonne should be deducted from his party's overall airtime for the European election campaign. The Elysée had argued he was speaking as president of all French when he said that Europe was in mortal danger, notably from nationalist, illiberal rivals. Mr Macron also pointed the finger at RN, whose campaign is being run by 28-year-old party leader Jordan Bardella, and which "wanted to pull out of Europe, out of the euro, out of everything," he said. "Now it no longer says anything. It's reaping the benefits of Europe, while wanting to destroy it without saying anything." He gave the example of RN's failure to vote for the EU Common Agricultural Policy, adding: "But where are they going to find the (EURO)9.5billion in funding? They don't explain it. And that's true in every country." He made an exception, however, for Giorgia Meloni, the Italian prime minister whose Brothers of Italy party has neo-fascist roots, saying that it had "a European approach". But "after that, the best way of building together is to have as few nationalists as possible". he insisted. Returning to France's relationship with the UK, he said the two countries' Lancaster House defence and security treaties made Britain a "privileged partner of France". He wanted to "deepen this" while having a "wider strategic discussion with all Europeans who are prepared to do so", notably through the 47-member European Political Community created in the wake of Russia's assault on Ukraine. Load-Date: May 3, 2024  End of Document
