   MAILBOX EXTRA: LEICESTER EAST GREEN PARTY CANDIDATE MAGS LEWIS WRITES Leicester Mercury June 8, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 361 words Body   I WAS interested to read letters about the pros and cons of Rwanda, Brexit, and the need for evidence, and its lack. These are hugely important subjects being almost completely ignored by the two main parties in this General Election. They seem to be at pains to ignore the costs and catastrophe of Brexit, the climate emergency and the costs of the doomed Rwanda deal. On Brexit, polls have found that most British voters see leaving the EU as a huge failure for the country, especially around broken promises on NHS funding. A significant majority of British people believe the country's decision to leave the European Union has been bad for the UK, as our economy has shrunk and stalled, food prices have increased far more for us than the EU, red tape has increased and the promised extra £360 million a week for the NHS was, predictably, a Boris lie. What is true is that the average Briton was nearly £2,000 worse off in 2023, while the average Londoner was nearly £3,400 worse off last year as a result of Brexit, a recent report reveals. Evidence about the need for climate action to avoid catastrophe, is ignored or brushed aside, even though it's overwhelming. Without action and investment now, the costs to every family here and for our planet rise every year. Already, UK families are paying £605 more for their food than they did two years ago, with climate change being the main reason for the high prices, according to researchers. Rising costs due to extreme weather have kept food inflation high throughout 2022 and 2023 even as energy prices decreased, as flooding here reduced farmer yields and extreme heat elsewhere destroyed crops. And Rwanda. We've paid out hundreds of millions and not a single plane has taken off, and is unlikely to, so to claim there's no evidence it has worked or not, is laughable. A failed policy for a failed government. I'm proud that there are some politicians unafraid to call out the Brexit disaster, the climate catastrophe and the need for leadership and action. People on the doorstep want these issues addressed in a grown-up way, so we need real change from the Labour-Tory bickering. Mags Lewis, Leicester ¦Mailbox: Page 13 Load-Date: June 8, 2024  End of Document
