   Manifestos a way to hold parties to their pledges i-news June 11, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 11 Length: 373 words Byline: Andrew Fisher Body   Putting together a manifesto is something I've done twice (in 2017 and 2019 for Labour), so I may be biased when I say they are important documents both pre and post-election. While they paint each party's vision for Britain, they also contain the promises to which they can be held accountable. They can make or break an election campaign. The first Labour manifesto I worked on, For the Many, Not the Few, caused much friction and debate within Labour HQ, it made a huge difference to the polls. When the manifesto was officially launched, Labour still languished 17 points behind. By polling day that had gone down to just 2.4 points. According to YouGov our manifesto was the main reason why voters voted Labour in 2017. In 2019, however, things had changed and the election was dominated by Brexit. It became known as "the Brexit election'" and the Tories' election slogan "Get Brexit done" resonated with an electorate fed up of parliamentary deadlock on the issue. Labour's position on Brexit had attempted to be a compromise. A lack of leadership on the issue meant the void was filled by competing demands, leaving a policy that took a paragraph to explain in the manifesto and satisfied no one. It left the biggest issue of the day up in the air. The dominance of Brexit in 2019 also reduced space for other policies to be aired - which proved electorally bad for Labour, but as it turns out, also bad for the Conservatives. While manifestos can shift election campaigns, they are also vital tools for holding governments to account. Beyond the slogan, the 2019 Conservative manifesto set out the party's commitments. Among their many broken pledges are: 40 new hospitals, banning no-fault evictions, not raising national insurance, maintaining the pensions triple lock (they suspended it for a year) and building 300,000 homes a year. For a government, the previous manifesto becomes a device to hold it to account: has it delivered on the promises to the electorate at the last election? If it didn't implement its key pledges last time, why trust it this time? So even if none of the party manifestos inspires you, save copies to hold the parties to account. Andrew Fisher is a former executive director of policy for the Labour Party Load-Date: June 10, 2024  End of Document
