   Nation's ills can be traced to Osborne's austerity i-news June 26, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 24 Length: 796 words Byline: Sasha Swire Body   On Thursday 4 July 2024, polling day, I will be retiring from political diary writing. I have been documenting political events, thoughts and personal reflections on political affairs since 1997 when my husband Hugo first contested, as a Conservative candidate, the Scottish seat of Greenock and Inverclyde where he landed in an undignified but valiantly fought fourth place. Since then, I have written many millions of words on the rise and what appears to be the imminent fall of the Conservative Party. The diaries start with the almost uncontrollable enthusiasm of a young couple trying to find a parliamentary seat, then landing one, then fighting to keep it between the years 2001 and 2019. It is a helter-skelter ride through history and covers seven prime ministers (Tony Blair, Gordon Brown, David Cameron, Theresa May, Boris Johnson, Liz Truss, Rishi Sunak) and the events that shook the very foundations of their regimes: the Iraq War, the expenses scandal, Brexit, the pandemic - to name but a few. Just like the fairground attraction itself as it accelerates, it was a mixture of exhilaration and fear heightened by many twists, turns, and drops. When I flip back through the pages, I would conclude that Cameron was a good leader and ran a tight ship, but that many of the nation's ills we are experiencing today can be traced back to George Osborne's ill-conceived doctrine of austerity. From reducing the funding of local government by 49 per cent between 2011 and 2018, to the absence of funding in the justice and penal system and social care to insisting on pay freezes on public sector workers. No doubt the former chancellor will have his excuses, such as the budget crisis in the eurozone and the large deficit in the government's budget, even though there were green shoots of recovery in the economy at that time. My criticism of that era was that there was no real empathy; it appeared to be all about money rather than people, with no understanding of how hard it would hit people at ground level and for how long. After Cameron we had May, who didn't have the personality to hold her party together or, as a Remainer, the conviction to push through Brexit. Johnson was a superb campaigner but too chaotic a character to be a good leader. Truss was a disaster. As for Sunak, he never had a hope, considering what he inherited. But there were many positives: a reformed education system, the lowest unemployment rates in decades by the mid-2010s, the introduction of universal credit to simplify the benefits system and incentivise work, the expansion of renewable energy resources, same-sex marriage, the roll-out of one of the world's fastest Covid-19 vaccination programmes, leading to a high percentage of the population being vaccinated. And, love it or loathe it, Brexit. But ultimately it was Brexit that broke the Conservatives; it split them and exhausted them. Then, just as they started getting their act together, the pandemic struck - after which they returned to civil war by playing musical chairs with their leaders. The watershed moment: Trussonomics. So, to end the diary now feels like a story arc completion, with the primary narrative coming to its natural resolution. For now, all the major plot points, the conflicts, have ended and the characters are about to leave the stage and a new set of players, with a different set of conflicts, will provide another main storyline. Somewhere buried amongst them will be a secret scribbler, just like I was, probably sitting on the fringes. The best diaries are not usually written by the principal actors, the presidents, the prime ministers - they are far too busy to have a better 360-degree vision than a private secretary or a junior or, dare I say it, a wife. Often, it is those diaries about the effects of being close to power, not about being powerful, that makes the best read. Diaries are an important window into high politics. They fill those bits of the historical narrative that official documents of the time cannot capture. They give colour to the events. They fill in the motivations of the characters, they reveal their warts and their foibles. They shine a light on an exclusive world. Most importantly, they are written in real time, unlike the retrospective and mostly boring tomes of former politicians. You need to be a good observer, to be alert to the trivial as well as the momentous and have an ability to never appear virtuous - no one wants to read a righteous diarist. And you must show candour and humour. If you publish them in your lifetime, have a tin hat at the ready, because the shit will well and truly hit the fan. The only thing left for me to do now, is decide whether I want to publish more of them, and when. But ultimately it was Brexit that broke the Conservatives Load-Date: June 26, 2024  End of Document
