   Nigel Farage harangues 'and uses' Gurnos in 'divisive' speech attacking Welsh Labour's record The Western Mail June 18, 2024 Tuesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6,7 Length: 1742 words Byline: DAVID HUGHES; CLAUDIA SAVAGE Body   NIGEL FARAGE'S party, Reform UK, yesterday brought the UK's media to one of the most deprived areas of Wales to launch its manifesto for the General Election. Mr Farage said he chose the sports and social club in Gurnos, Merthyr Tydfil, as Wales is an example of "what happens to a country when Labour is in charge". One critic called him a "parasite", exploiting the problems of postindustrial communities like those of south Wales. Professor Brad Evans, of Bath University, who was raised in Rhondda, said Mr Farage's divisive rhetoric simply fuels anger in communities failed by the classes to which he belongs. Mr Farage spent much of this speech in Gurnos attacking the Welsh Government. He said that the lessons of Labour leadership in Wales are higher council taxes, higher spending per capita and worse public services. "The figures in Wales are truly astonishing," he said, pointing to NHS waiting-lists and the "lefty" direction of education standards. Reform's priorities for the UK include freezing "non-essential" immigration, cutting corporation tax and slashing "government waste". Mr Farage, who is calling the manifesto a "contract", attacked Labour's record in Wales and the Tories' "feeble" opposition. "Schools are worse than in England, NHS waiting-lists are longer than in England, Covid restrictions were even tighter than in England and now Welsh motorists are being soaked by literally hundreds of speed cameras to enforce the deeply unpopular new 20mph blanket speed limit in towns and villages," he said. "Since devolution, the Welsh have been ignored by the London political establishment and let down by the Labour administration they elected. Meanwhile, the Tories have been the official opposition almost solidly since 2016 and have achieved zilch, which probably explains why we are neck and neck with them in the polls in Wales." T"  here were boos from the crowd as he mentioned the 20mph limit. He said Labour is "not that different to the Conservatives, just more incompetent". He said he wants Reform UK to establish a "bridgehead" in Parliament with a view to a full assault in five years' time as he launched his party's set of election promises. The Reform leader suggested he could be in No 10 following the next general election, but the July 4 contest is too early for his party. ""he real ambition is the 2029 General Election," he said, "but this is our first big push." T"  he Reform document is titled "Our Contract With You" because Mr Farage said the word "manifesto" ha become associated with "lies" told by the main Westminster parties. The plan includes: ¦ A commitment to leave the European Convention on Human Rights and a policy of sending migrants who arrive in small boats back to France; ¦ a "freeze" on non-essential immigration "to protect our culture and identity"; ¦ increasing the income tax personal allowance to £20,000, raising the threshold for paying the higher rate to £70,000, and scrapping inheritance tax on estates under £2m; ¦ cutting the main corporation tax rate from 25% to 15% in three years; ¦ slashing fuel duty by 20p per litre, scrapping VAT on energy bills, and cutting stamp duty to 0% on sales below £750,000; ¦ eliminating NHS waiting-lists in two years with an extra £17bn a year for health. Reform's plans imply spending an extra £141bn a year on tax cuts and various policy pledges, paid for by £156bn of savings in public spending and an assumption of increased tax revenue from 1%-1.5% extra economic growth. But the Institute for Fiscal Studies think-tank said Reform's plans are based on "extremely optimist assumptions" about growth, and the sums "do not add up". Responding to the claims from the IFS, Mr Farage said: "Change is problematic. All change with anything in life. "If you want to change things radically, it's always going to be problematic. "And those who are part of the status quo might not like it and might not agree with it. "But you know what? We're the only party putting forward really radical ideas and this is what we're going to campaign for over the course of the next five years, and we think everything we put in that docu- ment is to help those at the lowest end of the income scale or those trapped on benefits." Asked about comparisons between Reform's plans and former prime minister Liz Truss' mini-budget, he said: "I don't want to work with the OBR (Office for Budget Responsibility). "I mean, they're part of the problem, not part of the solution. We need radical, fresh thinking. We haven't had it for years in this country. We are getting poorer." He added: "Britain is broken, we're presenting some radical ideas for how we can change that." Pressed on the calculation that his party's plans would create a larger tax burden than Labour, he said: "It's absolute nonsense." the Institute for Fiscal Studies' deputy director, Carl Emmerson, said: "Reform UK proposes tax cuts that it estimates would cost nearly £90bn per year, and spending increases of £50bn per year. "It claims that it would pay for these through £150bn per year of reductions in other spending, covering public services, debt interest and working-age benefits. ""his would represent a big cut to the size of the state. Regardless of the pros and cons of shrinking the state, or of any of their specific measures, the package as a whole is problematic. "Spending reductions would save less than stated, and the tax cuts would cost more than stated, by a margin of tens of billions of pounds per year. "Meanwhile the spending increases would cost more than stated if they are to achieve their objectives." He added: "Even with the extremely optimistic assumptions about how much economic growth would increase, the sums in this manifesto do not add up." Welsh Labour's campaign chair man, Jessica Morden, said Mr Farage's "divisive" politics is "not welcome" in Wales and branded Reform a "band of chancers seeking to sow division", adding: "It's no wonder that all of Farage's party were turfed out of the Welsh Parliament at the last election." Meanwhile a Welsh Conservatives spokesman said: "Labour have repeatedly shown their true colours on immigration, and a vote for Reform will allow Labour into Downing Street. ""he only way to see a tough approach on immigration is to vote for the Welsh Conservatives." A Plaid Cymru spokesman said: "For Nigel Farage, Wales is nothing but a prop to boost his own ego. He has sold lies to people in post-industrial areas in the past and will do so again [on Monday]. "Reform will blame all of Wales' ills on immigration, but what areas like Merthyr Tydfil need is investment and jobs, not Nigel Farage's divisive agenda." Prof Evans, of Bath University, grew up in Penrhys. He said: "Choosing to launch in the valleys of south Wales shows how the likes of Farage are truly parasitic and prey to local concerns. "Yes, these post-industrial communities have been abandoned. But immigration is not their main problem, it's decades of neglect authored by the elitist classes to which Farage belongs. "We should also not forget that the valleys of south Wales have a rich history of f ighting the forces of intolerance to bigotry. "His divisive rhetoric simply fuels the anger which is understandably felt, by communities who feel lost." Prof Evans is the author of a recent book How Black Was My Valley: Poverty and Abandonment In A Post-industrial Heartland. SUPPORTERS RETICENT BUT IMMIGRATION AN ISSUE THERE was not a big turnout of supporters. But before the speeches Conor Gogarty spoke briefly with a group of about 10 outside the club, who had travelled from places including Abergavenny, Cardif fand Aberdare. The group, mostly middle-aged or older, and mostly female, said they would not speak on camera due to fear of a "woke" backlash. They also said they did not trust the media enough to be interviewed. I pointed out we had been invited here by Reform. "We can't speak publicly because we'd be vilified as racists," said one woman. "Organisations, councils, they're all woke." "  Among those in the small crowd yesterday was Terry Donegan, 59, a retired paramedic who will be voting Reform because he wants "unsustainable" immigration to be cut, which he believes would lead to pressure on public services being eased. He acknowledges his home town, Merthyr Tyfil, does not have a huge amount of immigration, but believes it is a big issue in other towns. Charlie Rogers, 33, travelled from Swansea in the hope of getting a picture of Nigel Farage with a CD by his band, Deliberate Miscarriage. He describes the genre as Welsh death metal, which is "meant to be divisive", in a similar way to how Mr Farage splits opinion, he says. Charlie will be voting for Reform on July 4 after being impressed by their proposed tax cuts. Robert Sparks, 48, from Llanishen, Cardiff, is a courier. He will back Reform on July 4 because he wants immigration down. FARAGE DEFENDS BREXIT AMID MEDIA QUESTIONS BEFORE Farage left the social club, he took a few questions from the Western Mail. We put it to him that Merthyr Tydfil received a huge amount of regeneration investment from the European Union, yet a majority of its residents voted for Brexit, and may now be regretting that decision as food prices spiral up and few benefits seem to have materialised. Mr Farage replied that he agrees with people who are disappointed with Brexit and blames this on the Conservatives' leadership of the UK Government. He insisted he was always honest about what the reality of Brexit would be, saying: "I was the only one of the leading figures to say all Brexit does is give us the opportunity to run our own country, which means we could run it well or run it worse." But why should people in Wales put their faith in his vision again after the disappointment of Brexit? "The opportunity is still there,"he said. "We are self-governing." "  When asked what year people will see the benfits, Mr Farage said there have been benefits already. "The day we voted for Brexit were the world's seventh-biggest exporter," he said. "We're now the fourth biggest, so there are good stories there. The real failure to deliver on Brexit is on regulation, particularly on small and medium-sized businesses, and on mass immigration on a scale we've never seen before." He also defended Reform's manifesto pledge to scrap the UK's commitment of reaching carbon net zero by 2050. Asked what alternative measures he would put in place to protect the environment, he says the party is "very pro-nuclear". Graphic    > Nigel Farage speaks at a Reform UK event at the Gurnos Community Sports Club in Merthyr Tydfil to launch the party's general election manifesto Wales News Service Load-Date: June 18, 2024  End of Document
