   Not only is Cameron talking nonsense about Brexit and migration, his own catastrophic blunders in Libya and Syria have fuelled the crisis Scottish Daily Mail April 26, 2024 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 19 Length: 1264 words Byline: Andrew Neil Body   OLD habits die hard. When things go wrong in this country (as they do with monotonous regularity these days), it is still the default position of diehard Remainers - eight years on from the referendum they lost - to blame Brexit for all our ills. It's an addiction they can't seem to shake even as time makes so many of the arguments for and against Brexit increasingly irrelevant. So, when confronted yesterday with Britain's inability to stop tens of thousands of migrants landing on our shores in small boats via the English Channel, not only did Foreign Secretary David Cameron appear less than enthusiastic about his own government's Rwanda policy - of which he is clearly a sceptic - he also seemed to blame Brexit for the flood of illegal migrants. Not in so many words, of course. Our ex-PM and staunch Remainer is too canny a politician for that, especially now he's at the heart of a Brexit government. But what he really thinks was pretty clear. He claimed that when we were still members of the European Union 'we had a totally different situation where you could return people directly to France. I'd love that situation to be the case again'. Wouldn't we all? If it were true. 'People land on a beach in Kent,' continued Cameron, warming to his theme. 'You take them straight back to France. You therefore break the model of the people smugglers.' If only we could return to that golden age. But for the fact that it never existed. True, the EU had something called the Dublin Regulation, which - theoretically - allowed the UK to return asylum seekers to the EU country from whence they'd come, which in our case mainly meant France. But in practice only a small number were ever removed. You'd think Cameron would know this since he was PM at the time. But clearly not. So let's refresh his memory. THE Dublin Regulation was a two-way street. We could return asylum seekers to other EU countries but they could also return others to us. Between 2015 and 2017, the net number of migrants dispatched from the UK was 36. That's right: 36 over three years, or a net 12 a year. It's on this basis that Cameron looks longingly at how much things were better when we were still in the EU. It's nonsense. Between 2010 and 2017, seven years during which Cameron was in Downing Street for six of them, a grand total of only 1,200 migrants were forcibly returned to France. How he thinks such a system could cope with the 120,000 who've come by small boats since 2018 he has not explained. I'm not holding my breath. There are more fundamental reasons for thinking we shouldn't listen to our Foreign Secretary when it comes to boat people. When he was Prime Minister, his foreign policy only made matters worse. Take his disastrous intervention in Libya in 2011. Yes, its dictator, Muammar Gaddafi, was an evil despot. But we learned the hard way with Saddam Hussein in Iraq that there's no point in removing foul regimes unless you have a credible plan to put something better in their place. I say 'we' learned. I do not include Cameron. He clearly skipped that lesson. British, American and French air power quickly toppled Gaddafi. Cameron rushed to Libya in September 2011 to take a victory bow with then French President Sarkozy. 'Your friends in Britain and France will stand with you as you build your country,' he promised cheering crowds, 'and build your democracy for the future.' He then proceeded to desert them. Don't take my word for it. Just look at the devastating report by the House of Commons foreign affairs select committee published in 2016. Initially launched with limited aims, Cameron's Libyan adventure had quickly 'elided into regime change' even though he had 'no proper appreciation of what was going to happen in the event of regime change, no proper understanding of Libya, no proper plan for the consequences'. It doesn't get more damning than that and this committee, let us not forget, had an in-built Tory majority. The result of Cameron's Libyan intervention, concludes the report, 'was political and economic collapse, inter-militia and inter-tribal warfare, humanitarian and migrant crises, widespread human rights violations, the spread of Gaddafi regime weapons across the region and the growth of Isil [Islamic State] in north Africa'. The inevitable consequence of turning Libya into a failed state, with the chaos that ensued, was a surge of migrants fleeing for their lives in all manner of boats across the Mediterranean, with the UK the ultimate destination for many of them. And not just from Libya. As the country ceased to function, refugees and economic migrants flooded in unimpeded from other failed African states, such as Niger and Mali, determined to make their own way across the Mediterranean then spread out across Europe. Cameron, concluded the Commons committee, 'was ultimately responsible for the failure to develop a coherent Libya strategy'. That failure, said Jonathan Powell, Tony Blair's former chief of staff, turned Libya into 'Somalia on the Mediterranean'. President Obama's description was more colourful: he called it a 'sh*tshow'. Libya became the gateway for millions of migrants heading for Europe. The migrant crisis of the past decade or so is, at least partly, a 'Made by Cameron' creation. The charge sheet doesn't stop there. In 2015 the brutal Assad regime in Syria was massacring its own people. The West was under pressure to intervene to help ease their plight. But Cameron insisted on holding a Commons vote to sanction Syrian intervention. He lost that vote and immediately backed off any military action. I remember covering these events live on BBC TV. I left for America the next day. I spoke to sources over the weekend that followed and quickly learned that something rare had happened: a vote in the British Parliament had a seminal influence on American politics. I reported on the BBC that Monday morning that U.S. politicians were returning to Congress determined to follow the UK example and vote against military action. Obama saw the way the wind was blowing and duly capitulated to Congress. Cameron had pulled the rug from under him. Assad was free to continue with his carnage. Millions of Syrians gave up hope and they too began the long trek to Europe. You might be asking why, with such a blemished foreign policy record, Cameron is back as foreign secretary. BUT he has brought authority and gravitas to a cabinet sorely lacking in both. Given his experience, it might be hoped that he is now better informed and has learned lessons. But it is time he let old battles go. Britain would have major migration issues in or out of the EU. In post-Brexit Britain their resolution is entirely in the hands of the Westminster government and so far it has been largely bereft of answers. Indeed it has presided over an unprecedented expansion of net migration since the Brexit vote, with a net rise of almost 700,000 in the most recent year for which figures are available. So much for 'taking back control'. We await the outcome of the Rwanda play but, even if it deters some of the boat people, it will make no difference to the far higher numbers coming in legally, about which the government only tinkers. Cameron led a government which promised every year to cut net migration to the tens of thousands and never once came close. He has joined a government which is even less successful than his was - and it can't even blame Brussels. Until he has something useful and constructive to say about it, a period of silence would be wise and welcome. The rehashing of old, discredited tropes simply doesn't help. Graphic    Fleeting victory: David Cameron at the Tripoli Medical Centre in Libya after the fall of Gaddafi in 2011Picture: STEFAN ROUSSEAU/PA WIRE Load-Date: April 26, 2024  End of Document
