   Pint-sized bottles of wine on shelves from September in post-Brexit shake-up telegraph.co.uk May 2, 2024 Thursday 8:43 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 367 words Byline: By Telegraph reporters Highlight: Minister says seven changes to pre-packaged wine sizes will support ‘thriving’ UK wine sector Body   Pint-sized bottles of wine are expected to be allowed on shelves from September in a post-Brexit shake-up, a business minister has said. Kevin Hollinrake said seven changes to pre-packaged wine sizes  were set to come into force on Sep 19, adding that they would support the “thriving” UK wine sector by providing opportunities for “innovation and greater choice”. In December, the Government announced that the move to introduce the 568ml size would sit alongside the 200ml and 500ml measures already available. Pint bottles of champagne  were sold in the UK before Britain joined the European Common Market, and were on shelves until 1973. But their production ceased because they did not comply with EU weights and measures rules. The SNP’s Patrick Grady said ministers should admit there was “little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit”. The Glasgow North MP went on to urge the Government to “admit that its Brexit dream of people quaffing pints of wine” was always a “fantasy”, adding: “In fact, the reality is a Brexit nightmare of border checks, of reduced consumer choice and of business closures.” Kemi Badenoch, the Business Secretary, said: “I can’t imagine why anyone would be complaining about the sale of pints of wine. If he doesn’t like it, he doesn’t have to buy it.” Mr Hollinrake told the Commons: “The 568ml pint quantity is one of seven changes in pre-packed wine sizes that are expected to come into force on Sep 19 2024, supporting the thriving UK wine sector by providing opportunities for innovation and greater choice.” Mr Grady said Mr Hollinrake’s answer was “nowhere near as definitive” as the Government press release from December, which was headlined: “Pints of wine stocked on Britain’s shelves for the first time ever.” Mr Hollinrake said later in the debate: “Our wine industry is thriving. Over 900 vineyards across Great Britain, the UK wine industry produced 12.2 million bottles of wine in 2022. “Our new post-Brexit powers provide new options , including new legislation which aligns existing sizes across still and sparkling pre-packed wine so that both can be sold in 200ml and 500ml quantities, which we know there is good demand for.” Load-Date: May 2, 2024  End of Document
