   Pint-sized bottles of wine to appear on supermarket shelves from September due to new post-Brexit trade rules - but MP claims there will be 'little to no demand' MailOnline May 3, 2024 Friday 8:22 AM GMT  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Version:1 Length: 549 words Byline: Emily Cooper Body   Pint-sized wine bottles are set to be available at UK supermarkets later this year Pint-sized bottles of wine are expected to be allowed on UK shelves from September, a business minister has said, amid doubts from an MP over demand. The move to introduce the new 568ml size to sit alongside the 200ml and 500ml measures already available was announced by the Government in December. Pint bottles of wine used to be sold in the UK before Britain joined the European Common Market in 1973, after which production ceased as they did not comply with EU weights and measures rules. Kevin Hollinrake, Minister for Enterprise, Markets and Small Business, said seven changes to pre-packaged wine sizes are due to come into force on September 19, as he insisted they will support the 'thriving' UK wine sector by providing opportunities for 'innovation and greater choice'. But the SNP's Patrick Grady said the Government should admit there is 'little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit'. Mr Grady went on to urge the Government to 'admit that its Brexit dream of people quaffing pints of wine' was always a 'fantasy', adding: 'In fact the reality is a Brexit nightmare of border checks, of reduced consumer choice and of business closures.' He said Mr Hollinrake's answer was 'nowhere near as definitive' as the Government press release from December, which was headlined: 'Pints of wine stocked on Britain's shelves for the first time ever.' The Glasgow North MP said: 'Not will be stocked, not might be stocked, not could be stocked, not to be stocked - it implied that pints of wine were and are available to buy right now in shops across the UK. 'Will the Government admit that the reality is there's been little to no demand or interest for this supposedly glorious Brexit benefit and in fact it's entirely possible pints of wine will never be stocked on UK shelves?' Mr Hollinrake replied: 'Well it's never difficult to distinguish the right honourable gentleman from a ray of sunshine, is it? 'Our wine industry is thriving. Over 900 vineyards across Great Britain, the UK wine industry produced 12.2 million bottles of wine in 2022 and our new post-Brexit powers provide new options, including new legislation which aligns existing sizes across still and sparkling pre-packed wine so that both can be sold in 200ml and 500ml quantities, which we know there is good demand for.' Business Secretary Kemi Badenoch replied: 'I can't imagine why anyone would be complaining about the sale of pints of wine. If he doesn't like it, he doesn't have to buy it.' The Government's announcement saw former England football manager Sam Allardyce labelled as a visionary, after he was seen drinking a pint of wine while eating at a Chinese restaurant. The highly-circulated image of Allardyce emerged as part of the sting operation that saw him sacked from his role as Three Lions boss in 2016. The former Bolton Wanderers, West Ham United and Everton manager had agreed to meetings in Mayfair and Manchester with undercover reporters posing as representatives of a fictitious firm that wanted to buy players. This saw Allardyce caught up in an expose discussing a proposed £400,000 arrangement that would see him fly to Singapore and Hong Kong to address investors in the non-existent company. Load-Date: May 3, 2024  End of Document
