   Rejoining EU more popular among public than staying out i-news June 22, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 6 Length: 394 words Byline: Arj Singh Body   More voters want the UK to go back into the EU than stay out, a poll for i suggests, and there is strong support for a softer Brexit. The public is also more likely to be opposed to calls to leave the European Convention on Human Rights, which the Reform leader Nigel Farage and some right-wing Conservatives believe is necessary to tackle the Channel small boats crisis. The figures will add to the pressure on the next government to continue Rishi Sunak's efforts to build bridges with the EU, with voters seemingly unimpressed with Boris Johnson's hard Brexit. The BMG Research polling showed 47 per cent of voters want to rejoin the EU, with 39 per cent favouring staying out, while 47 per cent want to rejoin the single market and 30 per cent want to stay out. With Labour looking likely to form the next government, Sir Keir Starmer is also likely to come under particular pressure as a majority of voters backing his party want to rejoin the EU (64 per cent) with a quarter (25 per cent) opposed, or rejoin the single market (65 per cent, versus 19 per cent against). The Labour leader has ruled out rejoining the EU, or single market and customs union, as he seeks to win back Leave voters who deserted the party for the Tories in 2019. Oliver White, of BMG, said: "The main parties seem determined not to talk about Brexit, which is understandable considering the issue's divisiveness. Few also consider it a top issue facing the country. "However, public opinion does not strongly endorse either the success of Brexit or the nature of the relationship the UK has with the EU. Even if you leave the question of rejoining to one side, there is certainly significant support for a closer UK-EU relationship. "Presuming Keir Starmer enters Downing Street, it will be interesting to see if… he feels able to talk about Brexit more openly." BMG Research interviewed a representative sample of 1,627 adults online between 18 and 19 June 2024. BMG is a member of the British Polling Council and abides by its rules. Donald Macintyre, page 28 Do you support the following policies? Support ¦ Oppose Q A UK-EU agreement to remove paperwork required on food and drink exports 47% 11% 47% 30% 43% 27% Rejoining the European single market Extending the right to vote in the UK to all EU citizens with settled status Leaving the European Convention on Human Rights (the ECHR) 26% 45% Load-Date: June 22, 2024  End of Document
