   Ryanair’s Michael O’Leary: Labour can’t be as bad as the current lot thetimes.co.uk May 4, 2024 Saturday 11:01 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 446 words Byline: Oliver Gill Highlight: The budget airline chief has softened his stance on Brexit but still wants the UK and the EU to have a sensible relationship Body   Ryanair chief executive Michael O’Leary is cautiously optimistic that Sir Keir Starmer and a Labour government could revive the fortunes of the UK economy as he says it is time to draw a line under recriminations about Brexit.  O’Leary, 63, said that he had met shadow transport secretary  Louise Haigh  in recent weeks, whom he labelled as “impressive”.  Asked whether he was positive about the prospect of  Starmer  becoming prime minister, O’Leary said: “It’s hard not to be given what’s running the country at the moment. Anything would be better.  “There’s clearly going to be a new government and hopefully it will put Brexit behind us… They could not be as bad as the current lot.” The budget airline executive has softened his stance on Britain’s decision to leave the European Union, having previously been a prominent critic of Brexit. He said: “The failure of Brexit has not been the leaving the European Union. It has been leaving the European Union without a sensible trade deal.  “The no-deal was always the wrong option and I would hope that a new government would create space to do something with a more favourable trade deal with the EU. It’s time to move on.” O’Leary said that free movement of labour was also vital.  “With those two things, you’d release a load of growth and energy in the UK economy,” he said.  O’Leary’s apparent softening towards Brexit follow similar comments by top executives at Nissan and Airbus in recent months, two other companies that warned of the dangers of leaving the EU.  Although headquartered in Swords, to the north of Dublin, Ryanair wants to invest heavily in the UK by opening more routes from regional airports.  While O’Leary is an Irish citizen, his decisions have a big impact on Britain. A report by air transport consultancy York Aviation last month found that Ryanair contributes £14 billion to the UK economy while it plans to create 1,000 pilot, cabin crew, and engineering jobs in Britain alone by the end of the decade.  O’Leary is on the cusp of triggering one of the biggest paydays in aviation history as Ryanair shares hover near all-time highs. The airline’s shares must either reach €21 and remain there for 28 days, or the company must report annual post-tax profit of €2.2 billion, for O’Leary to collect the €100 million bonus, agreed in 2019. Ryanair’s shares hit €21 for three consecutive days in April before falling below the watershed level. An accountant who trained with KPMG, O’Leary joined minnow airline Ryanair in 1988 as finance chief before taking over as chief executive in 1994. Ryanair is now the biggest airline in Europe by passenger numbers and one of the largest low-cost carriers in the world. Load-Date: May 4, 2024  End of Document
