   SOLD DOWN THE WN RIVER UNDER FIRE Ross; Dan Vevers visits one of the most talked about seats in the election after Douglas Ross declared he would be standing as a candiate for Aberdeenshire North and Moray East THIS election is being hailed as the most important in a generation. Every Saturday our Election Special Correspondent DAN VEVERS will be looking at the key battleground seats in a series of special features. He'll find out what voters think and what the big issues are ahead of polling day. Today, Dan looks at Aberdeenshire North and Moray East - where Tory leader Douglas Ross is standing Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 15, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 10,11 Length: 1306 words Byline: DAN VEVERS Body   SKIPPER John Clark, back in Peterhead Harbour after a week at sea, doesn't have a lot of time for the parties vying for his vote this general election. "I spoke to a lad last night and he said politicians are like nappies - they have to be changed daily, and for the same reason," he told us as we caught up with him dockside. That mistrust and disdain for politicians is everywhere in Peterhead - for good reason. Fishermen, who overwhelmingly backed Brexit in 2016, thinking it would end hated EU fisheries policies, feel betrayed by the Tories for keeping them locked into Brussels quotas. In Scotland, unsuccessful SNP and Green attempts to foist no-fishing zones - or Highly Protected Marine Areas (HPMAs) - on 10 per cent of waters were met with outrage. Now, these people have as their Tory candidate the outgoing Scottish leader Douglas Ross - but only after he shoved his party colleague and respected former MP David Duguid out of the way. In a town such as Peterhead, already distrustful of politicians, that was perhaps a bold move for a man who wants these people's votes. Clark, in charge of the vessel Reliance III and a skipper for more than three decades, said: "What the Scottish Conservatives have done to Mr Duguid is a total disgrace. "To deselect him when he's recovering from a serious bout of illness in hospital is really, really bad. "And I actually think the Conservatives are going to pay dearly at the election for it. "It's just the way it's been handled… there's questions over Ross's expenses as well." In 2019, Duguid retained the old seat covering this area, Banff and Buchan, pretty convincingly for the Conservatives over the SNP. He wanted to stand again this year in the redrawn Aberdeenshire North and Moray East constituency - and had been approved by local Tory members. But Duguid, who had been recovering from spinal surgery, was set aside at the 11th hour by party bosses or, as critics have more colourfully put it, stabbed in the back. All to make way for Ross - who, despite promising he would stick to Holyrood, has now U-turned to gun for another Westminster seat, even agreeing to sacrifice his leadership of the Scottish Tories to see it through, and amid fury from his own ranks. Clark can only laugh when I ask him if he's ever seen a party of leader quit midway through an election before. But he's far less amused by how Duguid has been treated. "I actually think even if David Duguid wheeled about in a wheelchair or a mobility scooter, he still would have got the vote," he said. "Regardless of what happened with Brexit and all that betraying, he still did a lot of work for the fishing industry behind the scenes. CANDIDATE "I had words with him to the effect of 'you betrayed us, do one, eff off, I won't vote for you again'. "But really, behind the scenes, he was a hard-working person and the way he's been treated is terrible." In Peterhead town centre, local man Willie Aird is also under no illusions, saying. "I think the undecided voter may feel [Ross] has done the dirty. "He's got this issue with his expenses coming up as well now. It seems he doesn't know himself what he wants to be. "Is he an MSP, is he a leader, is he an MP, is he a linesman? I don't know. It may sway a few voters, although it's a strong Conservative seat here." How is he going to vote? "I'm not a Tory fan and now Douglas Ross has thrown his hat into the ring, I'll be anybody but Douglas Ross," he said. "I was conscious before I might have been Lib Dem or something like that but definitely SNP now just to keep DOUGLAS ROSS out." The Nationalist candidate is Fraserburgh councillor Seamus Logan - hoping to restore the SNP to what was once its heartlands, with Banff and Buchan previously held by the party for 30 years between Alex Salmond and Eilidh Whiteford. In the cafe of the Fishermen's Mission charity, we asked retired fisher Peter Strachan how he's feeling about the election. He said: "Terrible." But he liked Duguid. "It's obvious he's been stabbed in the back. But I wasn't going to vote for him anyway," he added. It turns out he's backing Reform: "I'll never vote for Labour. I voted for the SNP in the past, I'll never vote for them again. The Conservatives have let us down. There's nobody else but Nigel." The received wisdom is that Nigel Farage's Reform Party won't be a huge factor in Scotland come polling day. But Clark thinks the unique circumstances of Ross' seizure of the candidacy from Duguid - plus the area's pro-Brexit sympathies - could see the outgoing Tory leader face a real challenge from his right. Reform's candidate is Jo Hart - who we heard was expected in the town later that day to speak to local fishermen. Clark said: "After what DOUGLAS ROSS has done, I think there will be a huge protest vote against Ross which will be bad for him, as it's more or less giving this seat to the SNP. "I think Reform will do a bit better here." For Shirley Bowden, who runs local microbrewery Brew Toon with her son, she's not sure what to make of Ross. But of Duguid, she said: "David's actually been in here. He came across as being friendly, he introduced himself, he took some pictures with us and he asked how we felt about our business, so yeah, he was very open to any ideas." In Peterhead as in other towns and vi l lages along the north-east coast, fishing has long dominated political debate - but it's not the only issue in this newly-enlarged constituency - . Bowden told us: "They need to do more to lower people's costs and give families the opportunity to go out and spend money. "Everyone would like to see higher wages but what I hear a lot is also housing problems. "It's the basics. And you hear a lot about that here in Peterhead - . "The politicians aren't trying hard enough." Q&A Who's standing? DOUGLAS ROSS - Conservatives Seamus Logan - SNP Andy Brown - Labour Jo Hart - Reform Ian Bailey - Liberal Democrats Who won last time? This is a new seat but its closest equivalent in 2019, Banff and Buchan, was retained by Tory David Duguid, increasing his majority to more than 4000. The redrawn constituency contains part of Moray - the old Moray seat was won by DOUGLAS ROSS five years ago, although he squeaked home by about 500 votes. Who are the contenders? For decades, this was an SNP stronghold - with Banff and Buchan held by Alex Salmond from 1987 to 2010 and Eilidh Whiteford until 2017. Moray was represented first by Margaret Ewing then Angus Robertson over the same period. This is among the Nationalists' top targets. What swing does the SNP need to win? Combining the results from the two old constituencies in 2019, just 2.6 per cent. They may be aided by Nigel Farage's Reform squeezing the Tory vote from the right. Did this area back Brexit? Moray was the council area in Scotland that came closest with 50.1 per cent voting to stay in the EU. the fishing industry was widely supportive of Brexit - hurting pro-EU SNP candidates in the 2017 snap general election. So what area does the constituency cover? The port towns of Peterhead and Fraserburgh and other coastal spots such as Banff, Cruden Bay, Rosehearty and Portsoy. It also reaches inland to a spate of farming villages such as Aberchirder. Crossing into Moray, it includes settlements such as Buckie, Keith and Fochabers. What are the big issues? Fishing and farming. Oil and gas is also an important topic here, with a huge gas terminal at St Fergus near Peterhead. Anything else? The SNP government's failure to dual the A90 and A96 as originally promised by Alex Salmond is another election. issue. What if I've not registered to vote? You have until 11.59pm on Tuesday, June 18, to register at www.gov.uk/register-to-vote. Remember, if you're voting in person you need photo ID such as a passport or driving licence. The way Duguid has been treated is terrible SKIPPER JOHN CLARK ON AXEING OF TORY CANDIDATE Graphic    BLUE TOON Peterhead is part of the new constituencya ANTI-ROSS Willie AirdBUSINESS Shirley BowdenUNDER FIRE Ross Load-Date: June 15, 2024  End of Document
