   Sorry Record but you're wrong..Keir has little more to offer than Sunak Daily Record and Sunday Mail July 1, 2024 Monday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 7 Length: 719 words Byline: STEPHEN FLYNN Body   SINCE the last time I wrote this column, I did happen to notice that this newspaper took the decision to come out and endorse Sir Keir Starmer and his LABOUR PARTY in Scotland. At the risk of being a bit blunt and upsetting my hosts, here's why I think the Daily Record is wrong. The front page making that announcement listed what this election is about. Among the issues were poverty, a crashed economy, a cost-of-living crisis, broken public services and a failed Brexit. Hard to disagree with any of them. Chap the doors of any street in Scotland and those are the big issues facing families right now. So let's carry out a pretty basic test. Let's take each of those issues in turn and compare what Starmer is promising in comparison to the SNP . Take poverty first. We know that the single biggest policy pushing children into poverty is the two-child cap - that's the Westminster decision that stops support going to families beyond their second child. That povertyproducing policy will impact 670,000 children in the next five years. It's simple, you can't claim to fight poverty and at the same time keep the cap. The power of politics comes down to choices we make. The SNP would choose to scrap the two-child cap, Starmer says he's going to keep it. Next, take the economy and the cost-ofliving crisis. Everyone, bar the Tories, agrees that the green economy offers the biggest and best path to sustained economic growth - protecting jobs, cutting energy bills and reaching net zero. In fairness, Labour once had a credible and creative policy on this - an investment of £28billion a year to grab the opportunity of the green gold rush. That was the Labour policy until Starmer ditched it. All because he was terrified of breaking Tory spending plans. That depressing lack of ambition won't fix the economy and it definitely won't win the race to net zero. Starmer sailing Downing Street playing safe The SNP would choose to ditch Tory spending rules and invest the £28billion - growing the economy, protecting jobs and cutting energy bills. The next thing on this newspaper's list was broken public services, an issue which has quickly turned into the defining one of this election. After 14 years of Tory austerity, our NHS and public services are crying out for real investment. It is stating the blinding obvious though that you can't fix our public services by signing up to more Westminster spending cuts. But that's exactly what Sir Keir has done. The SNP choose differently, we rejected austerity for the past 14 years and we reject it now. The final thing that front page mentioned was a failed Brexit. I think it's finally time to wake up to the fact there is no such thing as a Brexit that could, can or will ever work. The Scottish people are already wise to that, it's why we never voted for its madness in the first place. Again, though, Sir Keir has fully signed up to the stupid slogan to "Make Brexit work". The SNP choose differently, we choose the path back into the European Union, where we belong. I obviously like to think that the logic of all those arguments and evidence is convincing, but even so, it's probably a stretch to expect this newspaper to suddenly reverse its decision and row in behind the SNP. But when the Daily Record did decide to endorse Sir Keir, I don't think it was asking too much of him to pass the very tests that were set out on its own front page. is into by it - all know that the Tories caused this mess, that's why they are going to get the democratic drubbing they deserve. We can enjoy the fact that they are finished. But this election campaign has exposed that Starmer isn't even offering to fix the mess the Tories have made. He is sailing into Downing Street by playing it safe and saying nothing. The real choice for Scotland is whether we give Starmer a free pass to impose more cuts, more Brexit and more of the same - or elect a strong team of SNP MPs who'll hold Labour to account and always put Scotland first. The power of democracy is that you decide what happens www.next.No party, no politician and no newspaper gets to decide for you. As always, it's your choice - it's Scotland's decision and Scotland's future is on the ballot. Please come out on Thursday and vote for what you believe in. Starmer is sailing into Downing Street by playing it safe Graphic    HARD HITTING Record front page Load-Date: July 1, 2024  End of Document
