   Starmer: Huge scope for closer ties with EU on defence and education telegraph.co.uk May 28, 2024 Tuesday 5:13 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: POLITICS; Version:2 Length: 495 words Byline: By Camilla Turner, Sunday Political Editor, Simon Johnson, Scottish Political Editor Highlight: Starmer government would ‘reset’ relationship with European Union in ‘our national interest’, says Scottish party leader Body   Sir Keir Starmer has called for closer ties with the European Union  on education, defence and security. The Labour leader said there was “no case” for rejoining the EU  and that the result of the 2016 Brexit vote should stand. But Sir Keir, who as the shadow Brexit secretary campaigned for a second referendum, said there was “huge scope” for closer work with the bloc  on defence, security, education and trade. Speaking while campaigning on Tuesday, he said: “We’ve got to take that on, a closer relationship, I think not just in trade but also I think in defence. I think there’s huge scope for closer work on defence and security. And also education, by the way, I think we could do a lot closer work on.” A potential area of agreement could be rejoining the Erasmus student exchange programme, which was established in 1987. Under it, millions of students have spent time in EU countries  as part of their university degrees. During a visit to Stevenage, Sir Keir and Rachel Reeves, his shadow chancellor, were asked about freedom of movement  with Europe. He said: “Obviously we had freedom of movement when we were a member of the EU, we haven’t got it any more and we’re not going back. There is no case for saying we’ll go back into the EU – we had that referendum back in 2016, we got an outcome for it.” Following the Brexit deal, Michel Barnier, the EU’s Brexit negotiator, said that Britain’s decision not to participate in the Erasmus programme was one of his main regrets in terms of social co-operation between the UK and Europe. At the time, the then Prime Minister Boris Johnson said “it was a tough decision” to pull out of the programme  but added that the decision to do so had been taken on financial grounds. Meanwhile, the Scottish Labour leader has said a Labour government  would “reset” the relationship with the EU following the “mess of Brexit”. Speaking on the campaign trail in East Renfrewshire, Anas Sarwar  said the party would look at aligning laws and regulations with the EU where that was deemed to be advantageous and claimed improving links could be “transformational”. Mr Sarwar said: “We have to fix the mess of Brexit that has been created by the Conservative Party – we have to reset the relationship with our partners and friends in the European Union. “When I’m talking to sister Labour parties across the UK, when I’m talking to ambassadors for individual countries across the union or I’m talking to EU representatives, they aren’t actually asking Labour to commit to rejoin the European Union at this election campaign. “What they’re asking for is to commit to change the relationship, to reset the relationship – and that’s exactly what we’re going to do.” Mr Sarwar said that Labour was “going to look at where alignment works for us and is in our national interest and we can look to build on those alignments”. He predicted EU member states would look at a Labour government and “recognise that these are people we can work with”. Load-Date: May 28, 2024  End of Document
