   Sticky Northern Ireland migration issue is a result of Brexit fudge thetimes.co.uk May 18, 2024 Saturday 11:01 PM GMT  Copyright 2024 News International Ltd All Rights Reserved  Length: 983 words Byline: Newton Emmerson Highlight: From teeth fillings to pet medicine to immigration laws, giving primacy to law made in Brussels is causing serious problems Body   Northern Ireland’s Brexit arrangements cannot defy political reality. That was the lesson of the “medicines sea border”, the protocol requirement that would have seriously disrupted medical supplies from Britain. Of course, the UK was never going to withhold medicine from one of its own regions to satisfy someone else’s paperwork. After a staring contest and some cynical spin the issue was fudged, although it is yet to be resolved. It is safe to assume the same will happen over the EU’s phasing out of amalgam dental fillings from January. Northern Ireland is meant to do the same but this would cause NHS dentistry to collapse. A veterinary medicines sea border is also due to come into operation at the end of next year. It would disrupt treatment of livestock and domestic pets, with knock-on threats to human health, so it simply cannot happen. If there are staring contests in the meantime, who in Northern Ireland would rush to defend the EU position? Stormont’s most slavish Europhiles would not insist your teeth fall out and your dog dies to uphold the legal purity of the single market. All this must apply equally, if not more so, to any Brexit-related crisis with immigration. Last week Belfast High Court found that the Illegal Migration Act 2023 breached article 2 of the protocol, rebranded last year as the Windsor framework, which protects the rights and equality provisions of the Good Friday agreement. A judge  ordered the scheme and its underpinning legislation to be disapplied  in Northern Ireland, leading to claims from the DUP and others that the region could become a “magnet” for asylum seekers. While these fears may be overblown, it would take only a handful of people to create problems. Last year 30,000 applicants were refused asylum in the UK, which makes them targets for the Rwanda scheme. Anyone moving to Northern Ireland to  evade deportation  would be unable to work lawfully or claim housing and financial support. Many would end up on the street. Just 200 migrants sleeping rough in Dublin have turned politics in the Republic upside down. The DUP is under fire from unionist rivals for claiming that its January deal to restore devolution ended the rule of EU law in Northern Ireland. The party says the government should have overridden article 2, although that would have caused a crisis with Brussels. Sinn Fein is under pressure to  take a harder line on immigration  as its support slides in the Republic. Already neither main party at Stormont would rush to defend the EU position. The government has no intention of overriding article 2. It does not want to be accused again of breaching international law. Instead, it has announced an appeal that is unlikely to be heard before the general election. The Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has vowed to scrap the Rwanda scheme  on “day one” of his entering office. This saga could blow for months but it has still exposed an aspect of the Windsor framework that guarantees trouble ahead. Northern Ireland’s agonising Brexit debate has focused almost exclusively on the sea border and the single market. The fudges and rebrands that have repaired UK-EU relations and coaxed Stormont back to life have likewise been almost entirely about trade.  Essentially, article 2 is a separate issue. It was the first part of the protocol agreed by London and Brussels in 2018 and not a word of it has been changed since. The provision was uncontentious because it was seen as protecting the  European Convention on Human Rights  from Brexit, which scarcely seemed necessary. The convention is not an EU instrument, its court is not an EU court, and rumblings from the Conservatives about taking the UK out of the convention are not plausible. Article 2 is far more expansive than has been appreciated, however. It covers EU rights and equality laws in addition to the convention rights, and requires them all to apply in Northern Ireland not as they stood before Brexit but as the EU interprets them today — dynamic alignment, to use a single-market term. These evolving EU laws have primacy over British law and domestic courts can strike down incompatible British laws.  The scope of this is endless, as is the potential for unwelcome surprises. Although the Rwanda ruling was expected, few people could have foreseen the case last week when 20 alleged drug dealers in Northern Ireland were to challenge the use of evidence hacked from encrypted mobile phones. An EU court ruled in April that such evidence was inadmissible. Their prosecution relies solely on data provided by European intelligence services. While disputes over trade can be controversial and political, they are ultimately in the hands of government, business and technocrats who tend towards practical compromise. London and Brussels announced a tweak to the Windsor framework last Thursday, giving Northern Ireland easier access to UK international trade deals. Rights disputes are different. They can be driven by activists, feature clashes of principle and prove inherently resistant to pragmatism. Customs forms and product labels can be changed; supposedly fundamental rights cannot. The Rwanda case was brought by the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission, a public body that monitors article 2 compliance. However, a successful challenge last month against the new Troubles legacy law was brought by bereaved relatives, with the support of Amnesty International. Democratic oversight of rights and trade also differ under the Windsor framework. New laws on both can be stopped by the so-called Stormont brake but the vote Stormont gets every four to eight years to replace the framework applies only to its single-market aspects. Article 2 is meant to be for ever. At some point people across the community in Northern Ireland are going to feel trapped by a serious problem. We will find out then who still feels like taking the EU’s medicine. @newtonemerson Load-Date: June 28, 2024  End of Document
