   Stubborn DUP must do U-turn on Brexit before drowning in sea border The Sunday Times (London) January 28, 2024 Sunday Edition 1, Northern Ireland  Copyright 2024 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: FEATURES; Pg. 28 Length: 1003 words Byline: Newton Emerson Body   magine a future in which the latest leaked deal for the DUP played out. I Rishi Sunak, the prime minister, has reportedly offered to keep Britain aligned with European Union standards if the unionist party returns to Stormont. All new laws at Westminster would be checked to ensure they did not damage the UK's internal market, just as all laws must be checked for compatibility with the Human Rights Act. This would prevent Northern Ireland from diverging further from Britain and requiring a deeper sea border under the Windsor framework. The EU would continue changing its own regulations, of course. To prevent the sea border deepening, Westminster would have to change UK regulations to match. This so-called "dynamic alignment" is a standard feature of trade deals, although it would be unprecedented for one country to pursue in a deal with itself. The concept - call it unilateral alignment - might be strange in principle but it is already accepted in practice. Last August, the government announced the UK would retain Europe's CE product safety mark rather than replacing it with a new British label as planned. The climbdown reflected simple reality: international trade requires international standards and Brussels has far more weight than London in setting those standards. As soon as the deal leaked last Wednesday night, it was recognised as almost identical to a 2019 offer from Theresa May while she was prime minister. This compromise was rejected by Tory Brexiteers and the DUP because it would not have removed the sea border entirely, while trapping the UK in EU alignment. For many of May's critics divergence was the point of Brexit, as a reclamation of sovereignty and to pursue a buccaneering free-trade vision. Some even saw a Remainer plot to use Northern Ireland to frustrate and ultimately reverse Brexit. The same objections, from some of the same voices, were heard again last week. Among them was the former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith, a member of a Brexit policy think tank where the DUP MP Sammy Wilson is a director. More ominously, Kemi Badenoch, the trade secretary, told the Commons that the UK must retain the freedom to diverge "to seize the benefits of Brexit". Sunak and the DUP leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, both face internal dissent over unilateral alignment, not to mention wider ridicule for wasting five years returning to May's idea. A common nationalist hope and unionist fear since the EU referendum has been of Tory Brexiteers and British Leave voters turning against the Union as they become fed up with Northern Ireland thwarting Brexit. While no government is going to expel the province or call a border poll out of spite, there are myriad ways that political and public exasperation in Britain could undermine Northern Ireland's place in the UK, or be used to undermine it. This danger probably peaked while Boris Johnson was in Downing Street. Tory Brexiteers are losing influence, the Conservatives are clearly heading for historic defeat, and public passion for Brexit has faded. Sunak's plan could eliminate the danger and turn the scenario on its head. Northern Ireland would quite openly be the reason why the UK is not diverging from Europe. The prime minister would have to sell this as good for the Union but otherwise harmless, presumably by pointing out alignment is necessary for trade and is what British businesses want. It seems safe to predict Labour will be in power by the end of this year, perhaps for a decade or more. Its leader, Sir Keir Starmer, wants a "closer trading arrangement" with the EU, meaning closer alignment. Measures already proposed include a veterinary agreement, which could solve most of Northern Ireland's sea border issues with food, plants and animals. Hilary Benn, the shadow Northern Ireland secretary, has also mentioned an association agreement. This could make the bulk of the Windsor framework redundant through de facto UK membership of the EU single market. Labour will pursue these goals cautiously, beginning with a scheduled review of the UK-EU trade deal next year. The party does not want to get ahead of the public. Polls show majority regret for Brexit but a desire to move on and no appetite to rejoin. Time is also required to rebuild trust with Brussels before attempting tricky negotiations. New deals are not guaranteed. In this scenario, Northern Ireland is transformed from a millstone to an anchor, keeping Britain close to Europe while a closer arrangement is sought. As Northern Ireland is in the EU single market for goods, it could come to be seen in Britain as a model rather than a problem. Labour might at least try promoting it as a model. Although this all looks positive for the Union, difficulties are easy to foresee. Unilateral alignment could prove an early disappointment, even if delivered. To some extent it is the worst of both worlds, as businesses must comply with EU regulations while still facing the export paperwork of proving compliance. There could be a public backlash against closer alignment if it is seen as a Labour scheme to rejoin the EU. The unpopularity of Brussels regulation drove Brexit, helped by British exaggeration about bendy bananas. These stories will keep coming, causing even more annoyance as the UK no longer has a say in the rules it follows. Northern Ireland could catch the blame. The most predictable problem for unionism is the stubbornness of its politics. To snatch victory from the jaws of defeat the DUP must return to Stormont, present unilateral alignment as a triumph and embrace Labour's soft Brexit. Donaldson's party performed an audacious U-turn in the 2006 St Andrews agreement, then sustained it through a decade of difficulties. Changing its stance on Brexit should be no more of a challenge than deciding to share power with Sinn Fein. But the DUP is a smaller, weaker party today, tormented by responsibility for unionism's Brexit disaster. Northern Ireland could be transformed from a millstone to an anchor, keeping Britain close to Europe Load-Date: January 28, 2024  End of Document
