   Sunak and Starmer trade blows as gloves come off in first live debate i-news June 5, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: FEATURES; Pg. 11 Length: 1072 words Byline: Chloe Chaplain Body   Rishi Sunak and Sir Keir Starmer clashed last night over human rights, taxes, the National Health Service and education as the political rivals went head to head in the first televised debate of the general election campaign. The prime minister did not rule out removing the UK from the European Convention on Human Rights and its associated court if it was necessary to get his Rwanda deportation policy working, saying he would "choose our country's security ahead of membership of a foreign court every single time". But Sir Keir insisted he would "not pull out of international agreements and international law" under Labour, because he wants the UK to be "respected on the world stage" and not a "pariah". The Labour leader attacked Mr Sunak's record in government, accusing the Conservative Party of losing control and leaving voters "paying the price". Mr Sunak, meanwhile, accused Labour of planning on "raising your taxes and raiding your pensions" and lacking in any other concrete policies. Taking questions from a live audience, they both confirmed that, if elected, they would not increase national insurance or income tax during the course of the next Parliament. And both said that they would not raise VAT other than Labour's plan to impose the levy on private schools. But the two accused each other of talking "nonsense" about their taxation and spending policies. Mr Sunak claimed that Labour would tax pensioners and hit every family with £2,000 of tax rises. The Labour leader rebuffed this, saying it was "garbage" the calculations includes costing for a Tory policy that does not belong to Labour. And he said the Conservatives had "clocked up billions" of unfunded spending commitments. The debate got off to a spiky start when Sir Keir claimed that Mr Sunak had called an early election because he believed the economic situation will worsen. Mr Sunak claimed that a Labour government would not have a plan to deal with challenges. "You are going to hear a lot about the past in this election," Mr Sunak said. "This election is about the future and I'm clear that I'm going to keep cutting people's taxes, as we now are." Mr Sunak defended his government's record on healthcare and blamed staff strikes for rising NHS waiting lists. But Sir Keir drew a laugh from the audience when he mocked Mr Sunak's claim that NHS waiting lists were coming down. Asked how long it would take to fix the "broken" NHS, the Prime Minister pointed to the damage done by the coronavirus pandemic. He acknowledged that it would take time to recover but insisted: "We are now making progress: waiting lists are coming down." The Leader of the Opposition said: "They [waiting lists] were 7.2 million, they are now 7.5 million. He says they are coming down, and this is the guy who says he is good at maths." Mr Sunak then blamed industrial action, eliciting groans from the audience of the ITV debate. "It's somebody else's fault," Sir Keir said. Pressed on how they would tackle education, Mr Sunak said that Tory reforms had made British children the best readers in the world. Sir Keir said Labour would recruit 6,500 new teachers to resolve this "mess", and he believed that levying VAT on private schools would give children "changes they need". In a snap poll from YouGov published immediately after the debate viewers gave Mr Sunak a narrow 51/49 win. Q&A From pensions to climate change and Brexit We asked readers to send in questions they wanted party leaders to answer. Here are some of them, answered by i's Political Editor Hugo Gye and Policy Editor Jane Merrick. Q Which party has a stronger plan for social care reform? Via live i blog A Social care has not featured in either party's election campaign so far - despite it being one of the biggest issues for many voters. This is likely because it dominated the 2017 Tory election campaign, and cost Theresa May her majority. It has taken a question in this TV debate to get Starmer and Sunak to say what they will do about this thorny issue. Sunak said the Government had given £8bn to social care, and that there are more plans to come. Starmer also says he has a plan for social care. We can expect these "plans" when they launch their manifestos next week, although it remains to be seen whether they will be detailed, fully costed policies. Q We know our children are going to have a very different future from us because of our ferociously changing climate. Why isn't either party openly addressing it? £ The amount said the had given and that plans to Dr Kara (@1pluseipi) A Climate change has not been on the main parties' agenda so far, despite a recent YouGov poll which showed that a majority of voters are in favour of green policies. Both parties are sticking to a very narrow policy agenda to target floating voters in the "Red Wall" and other marginal seats: the economy and NHS for Labour, and security, the economy and immigration for the Tories. Q Labour and the Conservatives have committed to the state pension triple lock. Does this make it more likely the state pension age will have to rise faster? 8bn Rishi Sunak Government social care, there were more come Tom Selby, of investment firm AJ Bell A Yes. Given the UK's ageing population and sluggish economic growth, the amount of money the Government is spending on the state pension is set to increase significantly - according to the OECD, going from 7.2 per cent of GDP to 9.3 per cent of GDP by 2060 (the year that someone now aged 32 would get their pension). With both parties promising above-inflation increases in the state pension, that may leave a hike in the pension age as the only way of cutting the bill. But it is very likely that any decision on this will be delayed as long as possible. Q Why is there no one talking about Brexit? Angela Huskisson @angiwrites A Many Conservatives regard Brexit as their greatest achievement over their 14 years in power, despite economists' consensus that leaving the EU has been a brake on growth. Labour is reluctant to reopen the argument on the topic, given the hefty defeat it suffered in the "get Brexit done" election of 2019. It is worth noting that many crucial swing seats were heavily pro-Brexit in the EU referendum. But there is little doubt that the next government will have to rethink our relationship with the continent in some way. £8bn The amount Rishi Sunak said the Government had given to social care, and that there were plans for more to come Load-Date: June 5, 2024  End of Document
