   Teacher: I really don't how he sleeps The People June 2, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 4,5 Length: 701 words Byline: SIMON MURPHY ; KEVIN DONALD Body   RISHI SUNAK last night got a roasting from his old teacher - who is going to vote Labour. Nick MacKinnon, who taught the PM at posh private £49,000-a-year Winchester College, slammed his "selfserving, opportunistic" former pupil for "the way he turned out". And he vowed to vote for Keir Starmer's party to punish Mr Sunak for his "completely unforgivable" backing of Brexit, which he says has put the country back 20 years. The maths tutor and ex-housemaster told this newspaper: "I don't know how he sleeps at night." The criticism comes despite the Prime Minister, 44, and his wife Akshata Murty donating more than £100,000 to the school he attended from the age of 13 to 18 and left in 1998. Mr MacKinnon said: "I remember him only as a boy at the back of class. "I recall little about him as a pupil but his achievements at Winchester are not in dispute. He was a very good boy and I am sorry for the way he has turned out, which was to become wildly opportunistic." He added: "I will be voting for Labour against Sunak. In my mind he has to be punished by my one tiny little vote, but that's what I will do. "It is a punishment vote for Brexit. If I'd done what he did over Brexit, I'd be struggling to get to sleep every night. "It should be on his conscience because it is actually tragic." "  Mr MacKinnon finds Mr Sunak's"His support for it was purely self-serving. He knew to a single new penny how much it would cost but he put his career in the Conservative Party ahead of that and supported it. '' Brexit be on conscience it is tragic "Some of his colleagues were maniacs like Liz Truss or opportunists like Boris Johnson, but Sunak knew. "He has a high level of understanding and they didn't. "You have to understand that Sunak is wired into the world's financial systems. He is highly tuned and gifted and knew what the impact would be but still followed that route. "So many people voted for Brexit who had no idea what they were should his as actually voting for. They didn't understand, but he cannot claim that. It is a slow puncture in UK plc and it is going to take at least 20 years to get out of this mess." Mr MacKinnon, a prizewinning poet who lives near Haworth, West Yorks, also blasted Mr Sunak's National Service policy as an "opportunistic punt" to garner support among pensioners. In an ELECTION push, the Tories last week revealed a plan to force 18-yearolds into military or voluntary work as part of a new scheme. Mr MacKinnon, who now also tutors in English and medieval history, suggested the throwback scheme might have a nostalgic Mr Sunak's time in the Combined Cadet Force at school. He said: "His idea about bringing back National Service is interesting but I think it is nothing more than an opportunistic punt for the over-80s vote. It has to be them because no one else is old enough to have any clear idea of what benefits it could bring. RICH TEA PM has a brew in Redcar "Perhaps his idea was in some way inf luenced by his school days because he was in the CCF at Winchester. It was a compulsory thing for all pupils. They would spend each Wednesday for a year doing drills and exercises. "There was the option of continuing it into community service but I don't know whether he took that up." Mr Sunak, who was the first non-white head boy at Winchester Collegein its 600-year history, previously said of his posh education: "I was really lucky to have that opportunity. It was really extraordinary. It certainly put my life on a different announced his candidacy for Tory leader in 2022, a cringe-worthy clip was unearthed of him at Oxford. In the 2001 video from a BBC series, university student Mr Sunak says: "I have friends who are aristocrats, I have friends who are upper class, I have friends who are… working class… well, not working class." In 2019, former Tory MP Rory Stewart poked fun at the then PM Boris Johnson by reading out a 1982 letter about him written by his Eton housemaster . The letter to Johnson's father, Stanley, said: "Boris really has adopted a disgracefully cavalier attitude to his classical studies." Representatives of the Tory Party were contacted for comment. simon.murphy@reachplc.com '' Brex"It should be on his conscience as it is actually tragic Graphic    YOUNG Rishi Sunak in 2001 voting for .PUNISHMENT PLEDGE Nick MacKinnon PM's maths teacher but wants him out Load-Date: June 2, 2024  End of Document
