   The Brexit failure; LETTERS to the EDITOR The Sunday Telegraph (London) April 7, 2024 Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: LETTERS; Pg. 17 Length: 344 words Body   - Daniel Hannan (Comment, March 31) thinks the downfall of the Conservatives started when they booted out Boris Johnson. On the contrary, it started when the country voted for Brexit. Brexiteers are furious about Brexit, as it is a disaster that hasn't delivered. Remainers are furious about Brexit as it is a disaster that hasn't delivered. Lord Hannan may think it's madness to change leader, and he could be right. However, it's all but certain the Tories will lose under Rishi Sunak, so I'd bring back Boris Johnson anyway, and it can be the next disaster he owns. Lord Hannan previously complained that there is no money for pensions. Little wonder when the signature policy of this Government, specically Brexit, is costing the country an estimated £40 billion per year in lost tax revenue. Gemma Wright London SW15 - Boris Johnson may have been a matchless communicator, but he was supposed to be implementing the benets of Brexit - not throwing money at vanity projects like HS2 or virtue-signalling on uncosted net zero nonsense. Lord Sumption once summed him up: "He's never prepared to put in the work that would make him utterly condent of his own position ... He simply does not have the intellectual capacity to follow it through. It's not because he's stupid. He clearly isn't. It's because he's intellectually idle." Robert Sare Chigwell, Essex - Daniel Hannan seems oblivious to the eect of Boris Johnson's cultivated Covid panic and the resentment that festers as its eects are still felt. A great many businesses are struggling to survive, thanks to being cut ofrom suppliers and customers while incurring ongoing costs to remain operational yet unable to trade. The eective abandonment of primary healthcare still takes a considerable toll. The imposition of lockdowns, masks and social distancing can never be forgiven, nor can the partying in Downing Street when the public were eectively imprisoned. Mr Johnson's position in oce and in the party was untenable. The party lacked the awareness to appoint an appropriate successor. Hamish Hossick Dundee Load-Date: April 7, 2024  End of Document
