   The far right and the politics of football Daily News (Sri Lanka) June 19, 2024 Wednesday  Copyright 2024 The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. All Rights Reserved  Length: 1345 words Dateline: Sri Lanka  Body   Sri Lanka, June 19 -- If you land on one of Europe's major league football websites you'd soon notice the pointed exhortation on the top right hand corner of the site. There is no room for racism it says. Today there is a massive rightward lurch in Europe with far right parties having made startling gains at European Union elections. This has forced Emmanuel Macron the French premier to dissolve the parliament and call for snap elections, hoping that he could avert total disaster and avoid a total capitulation to the far right forces. But why does a football league website have to go out of the way to proclaim that there is no place for racism in the league? It has become clear that racism is now a regular facet of life in Europe and such a commonplace occurrence in league matches that there has to be a special exhortation on a league website about racism 'having no place.' When a website markedly claims there is no place for racism,the signal given out no doubt is that there is a dominant culture in the continent which is led by the white Europeans. In fact, racism has become such an inherent part of football culture, that it takes precedence over football. It's why an exhortation about racism occupies the most significant spot of a league's website. There is no elephant in the room anymore. The elephant has been recognised and told that it has been given it's due place but is being "fought". The 'due place' comes from the official recognition given to the existence of racism. PLATFORM In Europe therefore the system is not in shock. The system merely wants to acknowledge that racism is there, and move on while it exists as a major phenomenon on the football field. But simultaneously there is a rightward lurch in Europe and those such as Nigel Farage are on the ascendency. Farage who fomented anti-EU sentiment in UK and was instrumental in making Brexit happen, is now, after Brexit became the utter failureit ended up as, claiming he is the leading voice in the opposition. All the current right of centre leaders of European countries seem to be on their way out. Macron thinks that by having a early election and heralding the inevitable right-wing government, he could make sure people get sick of extreme right-wingers in parliament by the time the next Presidential Election comes around. British PM Rishi Sunak who himself thrives on thinly veiled anti-immigration rhetoric and policies, is still outflanked to the right by unabashed extremists such as Farage. What does all this mean? It's that the football league slogan 'there is no room for racism' typifies the current situation in Europe. At he moment racism is beginning to hog the platform as the central policy in Europe. Why is there racism among football spectators? It's because, simply, a good many Europeans believe that Europe is for white people. By contrast, there is no 'othering' of people of various so called minority races in sports teams in Asia, and the Indian cricket team is an example of this race-neutral reality. Outlawing racism is not a policy. Our countries in South Asia are by nature race neutral. When Muslims play for the Indian team, nobody notices. There is no need to emblazon sports websites in this part of the world with the slogan "there is no room for racism", because racism never had a place in the central political discourse of South Asia. This writer has written about racism in Europe before, but the reason to bring up the subject once more is the fact that extremism is becoming increasingly the central aspect of European politics. Extremist right-wing parties in Europe ride the anti immigration bogey. But is this an immigration issue? Or more to the point, is the trend more a racism issue per se, clothed in anti-immigration rhetoric? EMERGING Racism is not the same as anti-immigration sentiment and the racism on the football field is the best example. Why do spectators hound players such as Vinicius Jr. with racist slogans, forcing such players to take the battle to court? This has nothing to do with immigration. Nobody is worried that football 'jobs' are being taken by immigrants. Celebrity footballers are not ordinary folk doing regular nine to five jobs, and nobody feels that white full-time footballers are professionally threatened by black players who have immigrant parents. The problem is that a large part of Europe has easily taken to racism. In other words racists in Europe are becoming more racist simply because they can. Those who carry slogans on league football sites proclaiming there is no place for racism are in anoblique way, the enablers. They are unwittingly making themselves perpetrators of this new emerging politics of Europe, that makes racism the central focus of European politics. Saying there is no place for racism so prominently on a football website is one way of being patronising towards coloured players. Theauthorities are not cancelling matches or saying we will not play football until racism is no longer a menace in the football arena. Instead they are in some ways institutionalising a culture of fighting racism in football. In some ways what that does is to make the idea of a racial divide more of a reality in society, than it already is. Inevitably the polarisation increases. These days, there is Hitlerite rhetoric that figures in raves in Germany that celebrate German's dominant status at the European cup tournament. Such neo-Nazi celebrations may be the absolute rarity and by no means the norm. But the fact is that all this - the success of overtly racist parties vying for office at European elections andincreased football related racism - is all happening at the same time in Europe. That means Europe is rejecting non-whites as Europe never did before. Of course the phenomenon has been in existence for ages. But it was thought that such populism so called would disappear as folk become more liberal and enlightenedin what is supposed to be a very meritocratic society after all. REVERSE But the opposite has happened. Economic stability has been compromised due to Covid, and the generally negative economic prospects that followed. The go to scapegoat for most politicians has been immigration, but even more importantly, the go to default position for a lot of European whites has been to take easy recourse in racism as an outlet for their sense of grievance. Perhaps sanity would prevail and far right parties would be rejected at successive elections in the near future. But that doesn't appear to be a likely prospect as things stand. Perhaps the far right would have to get elected for people to realise that it is futile electing race baiters to power, because they simply do not have the solutions. But rejection of the far right should have happened already. Brexit was itself in part a race baiting exercise but in spite of Brexit happening and spelling doom for Britain, racism has not been shown the door by the British electorate. Instead, policies such as Brexit have been taken by the so called saner left parties and made their own. The Labour Party doesn't seem to be inclined in any way at all to reverse Brexit for instance. In this general atmosphere of political opportunism, it is no surprise that hooligans are doubling down on their football racism. Proclaiming prominently that racism has no place has probably had the racists thumping their tubs. They have officially made a splash. Of course it is not contested that official or otherwise, the existence of a no tolerance policy towards racism is positive. But the policy certainly doesn't seem to be zero tolerance. It is a policy, it seems, that makes good immigrant football players want to continue playing football, because that's good for the game. It will take a long time for the white European leadership however to, from the bottom of their hearts, spurn every aspect of racism in Europe. Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Daily News Sri Lanka. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htdigital.in Load-Date: June 19, 2024  End of Document
