   The Tories should stop waving their Brexit flags. Voters are drowning in other troubles The Sunday Times (London) December 3, 2023 Sunday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2023 Times Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 28 Length: 1103 words Byline: Robert Colvile Body   Rishi Sunak is having a tough old time of it. Maybe that's why Ursula von der Leyen decided to give him an early Christmas present. When asked whether Britain could ever rejoin the EU, she said that in her personal opinion, the "direction of travel" was clear. "I keep telling my children: 'You have to fix it. We goofed it up, you have to fix it.'" For the Tories, there is no prospect more electorally galvanising than waving the banner of Brexit. That's why they leapt on von der Leyen's comments - and on the claim by David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, that the EU would be Labour's top diplomatic priority, and on Keir Starmer's pointed selection of the EU anthem, Beethoven's Ode to Joy, as the piece of music that best sums up his party. It's also why they take every opportunity to remind people of Starmer's tergiversations on Brexit - over the single market, free movement, even a second vote. And of course, it's why Labour usually tries to avoid talking about Brexit as much as possible. But unfortunately the Tory plan doesn't seem to be working. Even when Starmer announced that Labour would bring an end to all that silly nonsense about diverging and doing things differently - a nonsensical position which would essentially guarantee that Britain fails to take any advantage of its new freedoms - there was no Tory surge in the polls. Could it be that after seven tormented, tumultuous years, Britain has finally stopped caring about Brexit? Well, looking at the numbers, there's certainly a case to be made. Since the 2019 election, the number of people saying Brexit is one of the most important issues facing the country has collapsed. Shortly after that election, the campaign group More in Common found that far more people defined themselves by their Brexit tribe than by their party allegiance. When they repeated the exercise this June, they found that party affiliation had reasserted itself. Similarly, Professor Jane Green - one of the brains behind the blue-chip British Election Study - will be presenting new findings this week, showing not just that the Tories have lost Leave and Remain voters in roughly equal proportion, but that both camps' reactions to the big shocks in recent years - the pandemic, partygate, Truss, the cost of living crisis - have been nearidentical. What has cost the Tories among both Remain and Leave supporters, she says, is not their ideological position, but their perceived competence. And even if the Tories were able to stoke popular sentiment on Brexit, it is far from clear that the country would be with them. Europe is absolutely not the public's priority at the moment. But if asked to express an opinion, voters approve strongly of rejoining the single market, and by more modest margins of rejoining the EU full stop. This isn't just because the economic woes that have affected all western countries have here been pinned on Brexit, or because many see Brexit as having been bungled - including many of its most fervent supporters. Voters who have come of age since 2016 are monolithically pro-EU, tilting the demographic balance. In a new survey by Deltapoll, just 6 per cent of those aged 18 to 24 said they would vote to stay out, against 69 per cent who want to go back in. As a result, says Sir John Curtice, Labour's voting base is actually even more anti-Brexit than in 2019 - despite the party's relative silence on the issue. Even the Leavers who have come over are generally those that regret their vote. So, he thinks, there may be political space - and indeed pressure - for the party to take a more robustly pro-EU position. It's a fair bet that this advice will be ignored by Starmer, at least until the election. But those who fought for Brexit should be worried by this long-term trend. Starmer, after all, believes wholeheartedly in the European project - to the point where he stayed and served under his "friend" Jeremy Corbyn as his party's spokesman on the issue, when more scrupulous souls kept their distance. Brexit might not be on the chopping block at the election. But it's certainly at high risk of death by a thousand cuts. That risk is even higher because of another dynamic that's at work. I said above that the number of people who passionately care about Brexit has collapsed. But that's far more true on one side than the other. More in Common's polling found that the number of Leavers who considered Brexit "very important" to their identity shrank hugely between 2020 and 2023. But the number of Remainers saying the same actually grew. Similarly, it's true that only 15 per cent of voters name Brexit as one of the three most important issues affecting the country. But the dynamics have flipped. Before 2016, Conservative voters were far more likely to nominate the EU. Now, the proportion of Tories and Leave voters telling YouGov that Brexit is a key issue is in the single figures. For Remainers, Labour and Lib Dem voters, it's above 20 per cent. In other words, the cliche used to be that the Brexiteers blamed all Britain's troubles on Brussels. Today, it is the Rejoiners who blame all Britain's troubles on Brexit. Last week, for example, I pointed out on Twitter/X that fewer Britons had been leaving the country recently. Was that because of the pandemic, I wondered, or maybe exchange rates? I was bombarded with people telling me - some politely, many less so - that I'd missed the obvious explanation: the end of free movement. But the thing is, that's very probably not true. It's hard to know for sure, because our emigration data is pretty patchy. But historically, most Britons move to countries that speak the same language - America, Australia and Canada. And the collapse in emigration numbers lines up more or less exactly with those countries shutting up shop during lockdown. There was even more vitriol when I dared to point out that despite Brexit, our economy has outgrown our European rivals' during the years of Tory rule (although the figures have been greatly boosted by migration). For many people, the virtues of the EU are no longer an issue for rational debate, but an article of faith. And they will push that cause with just the same fervour as the Brexiteers did - not least in the Labour Party itself. The last thing most Britons want is a rerun of the Brexit wars. It's also the last thing the country needs. But if the Tories want to keep Brexit safe, the best way to do it isn't to scaremonger about Starmer. It's to prove to voters - and even Ursula von der Leyen - that it doesn't need "fixing". Rejoiners are now pushing their cause with the same fervour as leavers once did Load-Date: December 3, 2023  End of Document
