   The PSOE proposes to eliminate the fence of Gibraltar and give way to the free movement of people and goods. CE Noticias Financieras English May 19, 2024 Sunday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 634 words Body   Spain lost with Pedro Sanchez and the Brexit negotiation its great opportunity to have negotiated the status and sovereignty of Gibraltar from a position of strength -Spain had a veto-. And now the PSOE rescues the issue -now without a position of strength- and does so to launch an idea even more demonstrative of the international weight of Spain under the command of Sanchez: "Continue such negotiations on the basis of the physical elimination of the fence; freedom of movement of people; freedom of movement of goods and the joint use of the airport". The PSOE has recalled the existence of Gibraltar. But it has done so to throw a proposal, in writing, which further dilutes the chances of a serious and strong negotiation by Spain. The PSOE's plan The plan of Pedro Sanchez's party starts from three bases. "1. To promote a framework of friendly and good neighborly relations with the United Kingdom, particularly with regard to Gibraltar, without renouncing the Spanish positions on sovereignty". It speaks of positions. Not even of demands or demands. "2. Maintain diplomatic efforts to reach an agreement between the European Union and the United Kingdom that ensures the establishment of a zone of shared prosperity that benefits the inhabitants of the Campo de Gibraltar and the Rock of Gibraltar." The problem is that the EU has already given the matter as settled after the signing of the Brexit agreement. "3. Continue such negotiations on the basis of the physical removal of the fence; freedom of movement of persons; freedom of movement of goods and joint use of the airport." Quite a bombshell: giving up all control mechanisms in exchange for joint use of the airport. A plan that, as a first consequence, would have the absolute depression of the adjacent Spanish areas, which would not be able to compete in anything with an area that enjoys the incentives of a tax haven. All this without speaking of the blasting of the control of goods or people. The impact of Brexit in Gibraltar For the PSOE, "the exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union had a significant impact on Gibraltar to be excluded from the EU-UK Agreement. This situation has a sensitive effect for more than 300,000 Spaniards in the area of Campo de Gibraltar, as well as for the nearly 35,000 inhabitants of the British colony." The socialists recall that, "since the Brexit proceedings began, the Government of Spain has repeatedly expressed its intention to promote an EU-UK Agreement to ensure a future of prosperity for the region and a policy of good neighborliness without renouncing the positions on sovereignty that the Kingdom of Spain maintains in the area." The problem is that those "positions" were not claimed when Brexit was negotiated and Spain had the veto power. "The Government of Spain, together with the European Commission, on the basis of the 2020 New Year's Eve Understanding and the 2021 Negotiating Mandate, has presented the United Kingdom with a global and balanced proposal that addresses all those elements that make up a true zone of shared prosperity," the PSOE text points out. "In this way, and in the spirit of the negotiating principle, work has been carried out by the Spanish and British governments and the European Commission. In this negotiation process, issues of mutual interest of very different nature and technical complexity have been addressed, which require, however, the immediate attention of the parties to ensure the coexistence and prosperity of the area and which have been explained on multiple occasions in Parliament by the Government," adds the PSOE. And now it proposes "to continue such negotiations on the basis of the physical elimination of the fence; the freedom of movement of people; the freedom of movement of goods and the joint use of the airport". Load-Date: May 20, 2024  End of Document
