   This book would count as character assassination if May had one to kill Irish Independent April 20, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: REVIEW;NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 980 words Byline: Róisín Lanigan Body   heresa May was always doomed. T When she became British prime minister in May 2016, her premiership was a poisoned chalice, handed to her by David Cameron after his bet on a European referendum went drastically wrong. From the outset, her short reign - almost exactly three years - was predetermined to be dominated by Brexit, and the misfortune and misery just piled on from there. She presided over terrorist attacks in Westminster, London Bridge and the Manchester Arena, poisonings in Salisbury, the Grenfell Tower fire and a seemingly endless run of no-confidence votes. Delusional and Sphinx-like, with a tendency towards "pathological secrecy", May was a Thunderbirds puppet held together by sheer political hubris. She had wanted this job since she was 18, but for some reason in the decades since, the politician hadn't bothered to learn how to actually speak to people. "It is hard to think of another modern prime minister who lacked the force of personality to make themselves the centre of attention the second they entered a room", said one colleague of the 'blank' premier. POLITICS No Way Out Tim Shipman William Collins, 736 pages, trade paperback (EURO)17.99, e-book £ Nobody ever knew what May was thinking, and so they had to try their best to interpret her silence, much to everyone's detriment. Despite a crippling fear of confrontation, it seems she spent most of her time in office being screamed at by irate Brexiteer overgrown public school boys. It's this tedious little era of British politics, a war without the glory or the triumph, that Tim Shipman chronicles in No Way Out, the penultimate edition of the Sunday Times' chief political commentator's four books about Brexit. This volume (and his final one, which will be released in June) have been six years in the making, the closing chapters of a seemingly never-ending saga. Shortlisted for the Orwell Prize in 2017, Shipman's writing focuses in astonishing detail on the "most explosive period of domestic British politics since the Second World War". Beginning with May's early errors in the trenches of that war, No Way Out expands into the story of her three great (failed) negotiations: with her cabinet, with the EU and finally with the British parliament. His assessment of May - at one point someone describes her as "absorbing criticism like a black hole absorbs light" - would perhaps be considered character assassination, if the person in question had any character. The book ends with her renegade rival, the farcical and chaotic Boris Johnson, winning the keys to Downing Street. Johnson's Covid-era premiership, along with the truncated rule of Liz Truss and the transfer of power to Rishi Sunak, will form the final instalment of the saga, trying to finally answer "the greatest political conundrum visited on the British ruling class in 80 years". Shipman describes his project as taking on a life of its own, and seeing other writers covering the same ground as his 'punishment'. As a balm, he attempts to go deeper, providing "the level of granularity that readers of the Sunday Times and the two previous books have come to expect, without losing sight of the big picture". And granularity it provides. This is Brexit in all its ridiculous, The Thick of It-style tedium. Shipman shares with us everything, from the neverending WhatsApp groups backchanelling and leaking all over the seats of power, to what May ate for lunch (frequently turbot, it seems). BREXIT It's also a study of power, how it's found, how it's held, how it's used and to what end. This is not an explanation of why Brexit happened, nor is it a polemic about its merits. It's a maze of secret meetings and subcommittees, a ceaseless parade of reshuffles and constant, constant leaking. Instead, it's a chance to glimpse behind the gossamer curtain of Westminster, only to find it's not the abject chaos you always worried about - it's somehow worse. In Ireland, we may have attributed Brexit to political malevolence from a yawning empire struggling to execute its final act of British exceptionalism. Northern Ireland overwhelmingly voted Remain, and has been forced to leave not just the EU and but the single market and customs union too. Here, that situation is explained as incompetence rather than deliberate damage. Despite being the supposed party of the union, the Tories have never seemed to understand Northern Ireland. They seem to care about it even less. While tedium gripped the 'court' that was Number 10, in the North a tinderbox rattled; in April 2019, amid the discussions about the 'nightmarish' practical problems that would ensue if there was any kind of Brexit border in Ireland, May left the country to attend the funeral of Lyra McKee, the 29-year-old journalist killed at a riot in Derry. Still, the Irish border remained a pawn in Westminster's war games. At one meeting Johnson is reported to have mumbled "fuck Northern Ireland" under his breath, hating how central it had become in dictating his government's policy. Ireland is an issue for the British government at the best of times. And here, Shipman is writing about the worst of times, the Brexit www.times.No Way Out is a startling catalogue of missed opportunities to do things better, to do things differently. It outlines how idleness and incompetence almost undid the peace process, and led to a musical chairs period in Britain as the world headed into the pandemic. There's no momentum here, just chaos, and it's a frustrating read at times if only because it's a frustrating topic. Each attempt to avoid an oncoming political disaster is thwarted at the last minute as we follow May on her anti-hero's journey towards certain disaster, and as complacency and cock-ups batter a party already yawning towards splits and mutiny. By the end the crew all hate each other. Nobody was steering the ship. Anti-hero's journey: Theresa May Graphic    Anti-hero's journey: Theresa MayPOLITICS No Way Out Tim Shipman William Collins, 736 pages, trade paperback (EURO)17.99, e-book £14.99 Load-Date: April 20, 2024  End of Document
