   Time for Tories and Labour to come clean on cuts i-news June 13, 2024 First Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: FEATURES; Pg. 3 Length: 382 words Byline: Oliver Duff Body   There will be significant cuts to some public spending after the election. You know this, because we have been reporting it for months. The Treasury knows this. The Conservative Party knows this. The Labour Party knows this. Yet neither the Tories nor Labour has been willing to discuss it. Both parties have colluded in what the IFS calls a "conspiracy of silence", refusing to acknowledge tens of billions of pounds in tough tax and spending choices, required in order to protect the NHS, childcare, defence and aid. So today's cover story - where Labour sources admit this reality - is a welcome step (page 8). Of course, the Conservatives face the same choice between raising taxes or finding real-term cuts of up to £20bn. Rishi Sunak's manifesto pledge to cut £17bn of taxes appears to rely a little too much on rainbows and unicorns for economists' comfort. (Beware any mention of "cracking down on tax avoidance and evasion", when it comes to funding giveaways.) If Labour wins power, its economic inheritance will be rough. A grown-up debate about the compromises we face would be risky. Yet research this week shows that public trust in government has fallen to a record low. So the next PM and Chancellor must ignite growth, revive ailing public services and also hope that they can restore some faith in the UK's system of government, after the turmoil of recent years. Whither growth? Regardless of your view on Brexit, it is a simple fact that in the UK, business investment cratered after 2016. Firms did not know what Brexit would look like. Nor did plenty of Brexit's architects, so long-term planning was put on hold. And as Brexit has taken shape, new frictions have made our goods (if not our services) less attractive to European buyers. Labour will not magically fix this impasse. In Brussels, the UK must be seen to be punished for its insolence. So do also beware of suggestions that sudden economic growth will rocket us out of trouble, since the things that might ignite growth are either complex (planning changes), slow (productivity reforms) or unlikely (a fundamental change to Brexit trading). The truth is tougher. Some voters won't want to hear it. But we still need our future leaders to talk openly about their plans for Britain's economy and public services. X: @olyduff Load-Date: June 13, 2024  End of Document
