   Tories can roar back... but only if they regain a sense of purpose darned quick Scottish Express June 22, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Express Newspapers All Rights Reserved Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14,15 Length: 1419 words Byline: Patrick O'Flynn Body   TWELVE days from now, the British people may terminate the political careers of more than three quarters of all Conservative MPs. If the consistent pattern suggested by multiple opinion polls comes to pass on General Election day, then the Tories will suffer a different order of defeat and we will need to find new terminology to describe it. Landslide will not do - that term probably reaches the end of its tether if a party loses as badly as the Conservatives did to Tony Blair back in 1997 when their strength in the House of Commons dropped by a half to 165 MPs. Some recent opinion polls point to barely a coach party of Tories getting elected this time, perhaps as few as 50. It is conceivable, on these ratings, that the Conservatives won't even be the official opposition come the morning of Friday, July 5. That would be an earthquake of such a magnitude that it would bust the known political Richter scale. Even if there is some kind of recovery in Tory fortunes in the last few days of the campaign, it is now hard to see the party holding on in many more than 100 constituencies. Meanwhile, a quirk of the first-past-thepost electoral system could well mean Keir Starmer and Labour win a huge majority on the back of an insipid campaign and a relatively modest vote share of around 40 per cent. That will probably just about match the combined vote of the Conservatives, plus Nigel Farage's right-ofcentre Reform party. But first-past-the-post is likely to confine Reform to one taxi-load of MPs, or a minibus at best. Where the Right is bitterly divided between two parties - whose senior personnel appear to hold each other in contempt - the Left has constructed an informal pact between Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Senior figures in those two parties rarely speak ill of each other and there is an understanding that the Lib Dems will focus on about 40 seats, where they came second to the Tories last time. This leaves Labour well-placed to harness an anti-Tory tactical vote in the rest of the country. Nobody has ever come up with an undisputed definition of conservatism as a political philosophy - its sheer adaptability has seen it shape-shift too often for that. Perhaps that tells us its primary function is to hold onto power so that zealous "progressive" ideologues on the Left are unable to wreak havoc against time-honoured ways of doing things. In which case, being reduced to a few dozen Tory MPs, plus a handful of Reform ones, and facing the massed ranks of 500 Labour, Lib Dems and left-wing Celtic nationalists, will count as an existential crisis. There is still just about time to fend off such a rout of the Right, if only senior people in the Conservative and Reform parties were to set emotions aside and think smart. It wouldn't even take a formal pact. I F SOMEBODY influential on the Right were to draw up a list of Reform's best 100 seats, and 200 others where incumbent Tories could hold on with the help of Reform-inclined electors, and then publicise it, right-of-centre voters could probably be relied onto do the rest. Of course, the 200 Tories could not include those in the wet "One Nation" caucus which has done so much to frustrate recognisably conservative measures from being implemented. Reform supporters would rather stick needles in their eyes than vote for that lot. The fact that orchestrated tactical voting on the Right probably will not happen this year is largely the fault of the Conservative party leadership. Time and again, it has spurned opportunities either to bring Farage into the fold or to resolutely occupy the political space he once again dominates. Instead, it has complacently assumed him to be a busted flush time after time, only to find out differently and to its cost. This was plainest when it thought the EU referendum was the former UKIP leader's final moment on centre stage in 2016, only for him to return with the Brexit party in 2019 and bring down Theresa May by thrashing the Tories in the European parliamentary elections.There was also the belief that Boris Johnson had finally vanquished Farage in 2019 by matching his campaigning brio and seizing the mantle of Britain's Brexit spearhead from him. But look who's back - back again - in 2024, with a third populist political vehicle… Reform UK. Rather than give Farage the peerage that even his sternest critics would struggle to dispute he is due, the Tory elite has treated him with disdain throughout. Even when UKIP had two MPs, then prime minister David Cameron failed to invite Farage to lay a wreath, along with other minor party leaders, at the Cenotaph on Remembrance Sunday. And while they finally implemented Brexit just about passably - apart from in Northern Ireland - the Conservatives grew complacent by allowing legal immigration to rocket and failing to stem the tide of illegal immigration. Even worse, they ditched Johnson, the one figure they had with a proven following among the sorts of voters who found Farage attractive. The signs are not good that the Tory elite have learnt their lesson, even now.Two of the most likely contenders to take over the party leadership from Rishi Sunak - Kemi Badenoch and Robert Jenrick - have both said in recent weeks that they would not wish to work with Farage. But if he is in the next parliament as Reform MP for Clacton, they may have little choice. Because Tory credentials on all the totemic policies he stands for - bolstering our borders, cutting and simplifying taxes, tough law and order, reining back expensive net zero commitments - are threadbare, to say the least. To imagine Farage's support will melt away again, restoring the Tory monopoly over right-of-centre politics, is to take a lot for granted. It is at least as likely that he will be able to use a Commons platform to take leadership of these causes himself, just as he wrestled the Eurosceptic cause out of Tory hands in the European Parliament and then hardened and honed it into a devastating force. If someone like Badenoch, who seems to be a politician with just as strong a will as Farage's, really is intent on rebuilding popular conservatism without cutting a deal with him, then she will need to find a way to quickly marginalise the "liberal Conservative" tendency that has held her party back since Brexit. Nobody is going to believe the Tories capable of reducing immigration, fighting off politically correct attacks on British history and heritage, locking up more criminals, running a dynamic economy or repatriating UK legal sovereignty from the European Court of Human Rights, when a third of their MPs have views that are virtually indistinguishable from the Lib Dems. In the end, conservatism as a strain of political thought is not going to die, no matter how huge a Labour majority we get. Belief in family, community and nation - its building blocks - runs both deep and wide with the British public. M OST of the forces propelling the Right to pre-eminence across Europe are present here, too: anxiety about the threat to national values posed by Islamist radicals, fury at the dismantling of meaningful national borders, unhappiness at being over-taxed by an inefficient and bloated state, seething resentment about the welfare system and social housing being far too open to foreign nationals at the expense of citizens. Left-leaning "centrists" such as Starmer or his Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves do not have the answers to these concerns and are much more likely to further aggravate them. It is therefore not inconceivable that a rejuvenated Tory party with a renewed sense of purpose can come roaring back very quickly. Many right wing voters turning their backs on the Tories this time round are doing so in the expectation of clearing space for a more authentically conservative force to emerge and offer them what they want at the 2029 general election. As we prepare to bid farewell to Sunak and his establishment chums, it is only fair to reflect that they were dealt a difficult hand. Yes, they needlessly turned implementing Brexit into a four-year psychodrama, but as soon as it got done, Covid then arrived. Immediately after the pandemic, Putin invaded Ukraine, setting off an energy price shock across Europe. In the midst of the maelstrom, the party leaders forgot what it was to be conservatives. They'd better remember pretty darned quick. 'The signs are not good the Conservative elite have learned their lesson... even now' 'Time and again, the Tories have spurned opportunities to bring Farage into the fold' Graphic    BATTLE OF WILLS: Rishi Sunak and Nigel Farage, whose parties appear to be locked in a fight to the deathPictures: JAMES MANNING/STEFAN ROUSSEAU/PA Load-Date: June 22, 2024  End of Document
