   Tories are following the Trump playbook Leicester Mercury June 13, 2024 Thursday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 13 Length: 584 words Body   PETER Jackson ("Brexit? Hard right? Opinion, not evidence," Mailbox, June 7) writes in support of Brexit, Rwanda and a "left-wing" Tory Party. He suggests my letters fail to provide evidence in support of my arguments. Mr Jackson contends that opinion is divided on Brexit. He is correct. The farming industry (note what Minette Batters of the NFU has said), the fishing industry (fishermen), the car industry, the London School of Economics and the Greater London Authority (research reports on the economic damage), the City of London, the British people (now with a majority in the polls for Rejoin), a recent Question Time audience and Nigel Farage (himself the architect of Brexit) all say it has been a disaster, but Mr Jackson says it hasn't. So, yes, opinion is divided. Mr Jackson is free to add evidence in support of Brexit. He can't, and he won't. Because there is absolutely none. Remainers like myself have been waiting almost ten years to see just one benefit - just one - but there is none; absolutely nil. Mr Jackson says the Rwanda scheme "may or may not be a disaster". He then goes on to say it "isn't happening". Maybe, Mr Jackson, it's not happening precisely because it's a disaster? Do please look up the term "cognitive dissonance". He then goes on to challenge my assertion the Tories have moved "hard right". Let's examine exactly what they have done whilst in office. First, Brexit, a nationalist, isolationist policy akin to the many policies pursued by demagogues around the world. In doing so, they created a fictitious enemy - the EU. They indulged us in the Dolchstoss theoreum - the idea Britain had been hard done by and needed to be "freed" to find its own way in the world. A complete fiction and deceit. The Tories, and their clients in the hard right press attacked the judiciary - that despicable "Enemies of the People" headline. They promoted the idea that anyone who supported being in the EU was a traitor. People who voted Leave have no idea how much bitterness that left, and a desire that by hook or by crook Remainers will take this country back into the EU. Their Rwanda policy decreed "Rwanda is safe" despite the fact the Supreme Court found it wasn't. This was nothing short of an Ermächtigungsgesetz, the law which passed all power into the hands of one man in 1933 Germany. It transported us into an Orwellian world where "The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears". The Rwanda Law is a truly petrifying piece of legislation. They have attacked experts and the universities. What is the next step - book burning? The Tories are following the Trump playbook. It was he who said he loves the uneducated. What a basis to build an economy on, but it's happening here. The Tories have appealed to the politically apathetic with slogans, lies and downright deceit: £350 million for the NHS, Labour will cost you £2,000, etc etc. Lies, lies and more lies. So, Mr Jackson, these people have in fact moved far right. Very far right indeed and they are chasing Farage. They are a fascist government on the way. It is deeply depressing that he and others can't see this. And, if he can't examine the evidence before his own eyes - and analyse it - then he shouldn't get a vote. We have one opportunity - on July 4 - to stop the terrifying march towards fascism. The Tories must go, they must be utterly destroyed and they must be allowed to rebuild only when they have decided to become a party of decency, honesty and compassion. Dr Andrew Golland, Leicester Graphic    HELD ALOFT: County's Rishi Patel has come in for praise with his top scoring form JOHN MALLETT Load-Date: June 13, 2024  End of Document
