   Tory MPs wrong to act like guardians of Gibraltar's sovereignty, says chief minister The Daily Telegraph (London) May 17, 2024 Friday Edition 1, Scotland  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 2 Length: 433 words Byline: Daniel Martin Body   GIBRALTAR'S chief minister has hit out at Tory MPs for claiming to defend the sovereignty of the Rock. Fabian Picardo, who flew to Brussels yesterday for the latest round of talks on a post-Brexit deal for Gibraltar with the EU, told The Telegraph that it was "wrong" to suggest that the deal would "in any way affect British sovereignty, jurisdiction or control over Gibraltar". It comes after Sir William Cash, the Eurosceptic chairman of the Commons European Scrutiny Committee, said he was concerned the deal would "erode UK sovereignty to the point of meaninglessness". Mr Picardo praised Lord Cameron, the Foreign Secretary, saying he was "very concerned to ensure that he gets absolutely the best possible deal for Gibraltarians". In a warning to Sir William's committee, he said: "They need to understand that this is a deal that needs to be done for Gibraltar, and it's the people of Gibraltar who will determine whether it is safe and secure." "It would be wrong for anybody to pretend to set themselves up as a greater guardian of Gibraltar's sovereignty than the people of Gibraltar who have been there even in episodes in history where the Conservative Party hasn't exactly covered themselves in glory." Mr Picardo also warned that Brexit had been a big blow for Gibraltar and that those who voted to leave the EU did not consider the impact on the territory "with sufficient weight". Discussions have been ongoing between the EU and Britain for months over the way Gibraltar's border with Spain will be managed now that Brexit has been finalised. It is believed a deal is close, but MPs on the committee expressed concern this month when David Rutley, the Foreign Office minister, appeared before them and said European judges would be able to rule on disputes involving Gibraltar under the Brexit deal. In a letter to Mr Rutley, Sir William wrote that the deal would allow "the pendulum to swing too far in the direction of the EU". Before his latest visit, Mr Ricardo said Sir Bill had not seen "any of the details" of the deal. "If they did amount to a genuine diminution of British sovereignty over Gibraltar they would not have my support. "The people of Gibraltar have been very hard hit by Brexit and we have not yet had the worst effects of a no-negotiated outcome on Gibraltar… In my view it is wrong to suggest that this deal in any way affects British sovereignty, jurisdiction or control over Gibraltar." He added: "When the detail of the deal is understood, it will be easier to make the judgment that will demonstrate that British sovereignty over Gibraltar is wholly secured." Load-Date: May 17, 2024  End of Document
