   UK is counting the cost of Brexit; Get in touch - tell us what you think Email: ecletters@walesonline.co.uk Twitter: @WalesOnline Facebook: www.facebook.com/WalesOnline Post: Media Wales, 6 Park Street, Cardiff CF10 1XR South Wales Echo April 10, 2024 Wednesday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: LETTERS; Pg. 16,17 Length: 650 words Body   DEREK Griffiths (Western Mail letters, April 6) asked, "Has there ever been a more stupid decision than the one to leave the market closest to us (the EU)?" He then went on to ask what his fellow readers thought. As joint chairs of Wales for Europe, we could not agree more with Mr Griffiths' statement. The decision to leave the EU has been a disaster in both economic and human terms. Economically, Wales has been one of the worst affected nations or regions of the UK. Wales used to break records for inward investment from companies wanting frictionless access to the world's largest single market. Mark Drakeford recently reported that since 2016 Wales has lost more than £1bn in investment. He also called out Rishi Sunak for falsely claiming the UK Government had replaced the huge EU funding Wales received as an area with levels of poverty below the European average. You just cannot lose large amounts of trade and aid without negative impacts on living costs, incomes, employment and public services like health, education and transport. People who voted Leave due to promises that none of these things would change must surely feel betrayed. As well as chasing away many of the overseas firms that used the UK as a base inside the single market, Brexit has discouraged domestic firms from expanding their EU trade. Many small and even some medium-sized businesses have ceased trading with the EU altogether. Without economies of scale and specialisation, companies cannot deliver the "growth" that politicians are currently claiming to want so much. Had we still been in the EU the UK Government might not have meekly accepted Tata choosing to close its blast furnaces in Port Talbot, instead planning this specialism for a modernised plant in the Netherlands, a member country of the EU. The list of Brexit costs is too lengthy for much detail here, but among other things, in summary. Brexit means: ¦ ¦ ¦ We now have to accept the rules and regulations of our biggest export market, but have no influence in forming those rules and regulations; ¦ he administrative hold-ups at the border have piled up huge extra costs with mountains of paperwork that have been reflected in supermarket prices and the reduced variety of goods on sale; ¦ British higher education and academic research have been badly impacted; ¦ Travel between the UK and Europe in many cases has become a punishing ordeal; ¦ British musicians are finding it hard to tour in Europe because of the costs and red tape, which Elton John has described as "crucifying"; ¦ The chair of the Office of Budget Responsibility has said the damage to Britain.'s economy is of the same magnitude as that from the Covid pandemic; ¦ Sectors such as health, social care, manufacturing and agriculture are all under severe stress, not only caused by austerity, the Ukraine war and Covid, but also by Brexit . Those who claim Brexit benefits rarely say exactly what they are, and never mention any trade-offs, such as cutting safety standards and reducing environmental protections. Even Nigel Farage has said Brexit has failed. When one of the people responsible for this mess admits it to be a failure, it is time for politicians to respond in a proper way. Instead of allowing life to be throttled out of the Welsh and UK economy politicians need to show some leadership to get us back on the right road, which is to rejoin the single market, the first step on the road to prosperity. We urge your readers to join Wales. for Europe and support our campaign to rejoin the single market and ultimately the EU. Dr Charles Smith Padraig O'Brien Joint chairs The small print: Letters will not be included unless you include your name, full postal address and daytime telephone number (we prefer to use names of letter writers but you can ask for your name not to be published if you have a good reason). The Editor reserves the right to edit all letters. Load-Date: April 10, 2024  End of Document
