   UK stands by ban on sand eel fishing to protect puffins - despite EU anger i-news May 17, 2024 SC1 Edition  Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; Pg. 9 Length: 384 words Byline: Arj Singh Body   The Foreign Secretary, Lord Cameron, has told the EU he will not compromise in a post-Brexit row over UK moves to protect puffins by banning the fishing of sand eels in the North Sea. Brussels has launched dispute proceedings against the UK - the first under the Brexit Trade and Cooperation Agreement - after French and Danish fishing industries complained about the ban on fishing sand eels. They have historically caught thousands of tonnes of the fish in UK waters each year. But the Government is standing firm over the ban, introduced to protect the favourite food of puffins, one of the UK's most loved seabirds, which have suffered steep declines. The row was discussed by Lord Cameron and the EU's post-Brexit negotiator, Maros Sefcovic, in talks on post-Brexit relations in Brussels yesterday. Mr Sefcovic raised EU objections, while Lord Cameron responded with the UK's conservation-focused reasons for introducing the ban. The Foreign Secretary insisted that the Government had "every right" to stop sand eel fishing and that it was not breaking any rules under the Brexit deals. A Whitehall source said: "I don't think we're in the mood for compromise on it. We've had our guidance on it and we think we are in the right. "This isn't about some land grab on fishing rights or fishing sovereignty. This is a particular environmental protection that we believe is the right thing to do." EU sources suggested that Brussels was not moving particularly quickly in the row and was relatively happy to continue consultations. The EU launched dispute proceedings over the ban last month, triggering "consultation", or negotiations. A 30-day window has now passed for an agreed solution to be found, but the EU has not yet moved to the next stage by triggering arbitration. If an arbitration panel found against the UK and the Government failed to comply with its ruling, Brussels could retaliate with tariffs on British exports and other measures. In a joint statement, the two sides said Lord Cameron and Mr Sefcovic discussed "recent UK measures in the area of fisheries and the EU raised access to waters post-2026". The pair also discussed the Windsor Framework deal on Northern Ireland, agreeing that it must be implemented in a "faithful and timely way" amid "outstanding challenges and upcoming milestones". Load-Date: May 17, 2024  End of Document
