   We're left of Labour; »»SNP leader says Keir Starmer offers voters more of the same »»Veteran claims backing Nats is way to boot out all Scots Tory MPs Writing exclusively for the Daily Record today, First Minister John Swinney tells how the SNP have moved to the left of Labour and insists Keir Starmer's party are ready to continue with Tory austerity Daily Record and Sunday Mail June 1, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Copyright © 2021 Reach PLC All Rights Reserved Section: NEWS; TEASERS; Pg. 8,9 Length: 887 words Body   WITH the General Election campaign now into its second week, the SNP campaign is in full swing. Our campaign is full of energy and hope - and, crucially, one that is focusing on the priorities of the people of Scotland. I have only been First Minister for a few weeks but this election is a fantastic opportunity to get out and about across Scotland listening to the people of our country. The SNP has faced some difficult times recently but I am delighted the party has come together with unity and purpose under my leadership. As I travel across Scotland on the campaign trail, it is clear that the Tories are finished. At the upcoming General Election, voting SNP is the best way to remove every Tory MP from Scotland. We are the challenger in every Tory-held seat in the country. And we are determined to do all we can to remove Rishi Sunak and his outof-touch government from Downing Street. But the SNP's ambition does not stop there. The people of Scotland are facing the effects of a triple crisis caused by Austerity, Brexit and the Cost of Living. These issues have a real impact on Scotland's people and public services - and they are all crises made in Westminster. Fourteen years of austerity - which was started by Labour and carried on by the Tory government - have cut through the very fabric of our communities. Labour". end to bonus cap two-child cap? BLASTS STANCE Unbelievably, Sir Keir Starmer seems to want to continue austerity. Yes, the party that has been the Official Opposition in the Commons since 2010 has no alternative. Sir Keir won't end the hated two-child cap introduced by the Tories. How can a Labour leader support a scrap on the cap for bankers' bonuses but not of the abhorrent two-child cap? It is beyond comprehension. My vision - the SNP vision - is guided by my moderate centreleft values. Since the SNP government took office, economic growth per head and productivity have been stronger in Scotland than in the rest of the United Kingdom. Scotland has had the bestperforming accident and emergency core units in the UK for nine years. National Health Service funding has more than doubled and we have the highest number of general practitioners per head in the UK. On housing, since the SNP was elected, Scotland has seen more than 40 per cent more affordable homes delivered per head of population than England has, and more than 70 per cent more than Labour-run Wales has. When we took office, renewable technologies generated the equivalent of 20.2 per cent of Scotland's gross electricity consumption. Since then, that has soared to an astonishing 113 per cent. Levels of literacy and numeracy at primary school are at record levels. Free childcare available to parents has increased from 412.5 hours to 1140 hours, and we have extended that to eligible two-year-olds. Recorded crime has fallen by around 40 per cent to one of its lowest levels in half a century. And this year, using our limited social security powers, measures such as the Scottish Child Payment are helping to keep an estimated 100,000 children in Scotland out of relative poverty. Those are SNP values in practice. And we would put thos' values into practice in establishing Scotland as a normal, independent country with fairness and equality at its heart. This vision could not be further from the lurch to the right of the Labour Party under Sir Keir Starmer . Brexit has wreaked havoc on Scotland's economy. Scotland overwhelmingly voted against Brexit but it was imposed by the Tories, resulting in long-term economic decline, making the cost of living crisis even worse. And Sir Keir Starmer, once a proud Remainer, hasn't just ditched his position - he's now an avowed Brexiteer who pretends that Brexit can work. He's singing from the same rightwing Tory hymn sheet as Rishi Sunak, Liz Truss and Boris Johnson. The people of Scotland are clear - Brexit doesn't work for Scotland. We oppose the damage to our economy, the higher prices Scots pay for food and drink imports, and the robbed opportunities of living and working across the EU for our young people. The SNP is the only party to offer a route back to the EU. So at the General Election, it has to be the SNP . On the Cost -of-living crisis - the issue that I hear most of all across Scotland - people are really struggling. Yet even after the damage of 14 years of the Tories, Labour offers no reprieve from the Cost -ofliving crisis. Labour". is committed to Tory tax and spending plans. The Labour leader even praised Margaret Thatcher and says he's happy to be branded a fiscal conservative. These are not the SNP's ' values - and they are not Scotland's ' values. Under my leadership, the SNP will always operate in the left -of-centre Scottish political tradition. Indeed, we're to the left of Sir Keir Starmer's Labour Party. Labour". has compl et e ly abandoned that tradition, drifting further and further to the right. And in doing so, they have completely abandoned the values of millions of people in Scotland's. Under my leadership, the SNP will always represent those left-of-centre values - and we will always put Scotland's interests first. caused by Cost of Living.  These issues on Scotland's services - made  How can Labour leader back end to bankers' bonus cap but not two-child benefit cap?  JOHN SWINNEY BLASTS STARMER STANCE  that Opposition since 2010 Graphic    PLEA John Swinney says his party is in tune with voters' valuesUNDER FIRE Starmer was slammed by SWINNEYRIGHT-WINGER Tory former PM Boris Johnson Load-Date: June 1, 2024  End of Document
