   Weather, bad luck or Brexit? Crop crisis and new controls portend UK shortages CE Noticias Financieras English April 22, 2024 Monday  Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC. All Rights Reserved Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved Length: 1352 words Body    In 2011, then Prime Minister David Cameron launched a program called "Red Tape Challenge" and declared the need to "free up businesses so they can compete and create jobs." In 2021, almost exactly a decade later, Boris Johnson said that "now is the time" to start working with business to deregulate the British economy. In 2022, Rishi Sunak pledged to remove or reform "all EU legislation and bureaucracy" before the next election.  But, far from the promised land, Brexit has not only created more bureaucracy and checks (delayed by the way on up to five occasions), but now forces the Government to apply an extra levy on food imports in order to cover precisely the costs of the new facilities responsible for these checks, including the £154 million center in Sevington, Kent. The measure will apply from April 30 and has been announced just 27 days in advance. All very measured for a historic divorce that took place in 2016.  Since 2020, importers have had to deal with, among others, phytosanitary certificates, plant passports, import licenses and export health certificates. But now they will have to fill out another extra form for animaland plantproducts and will have to pay a "common user charge" (CUC) of up to £145 per shipment.  All the polls ahead of the elections scheduled for the end of the year predict the end of the Conservative era after more than thirteen years in power. The Tories are leaving. Johnson actually slammed the door long ago. But the legacy they leave for the British people is a Brexit that, among other things, is causing major food shortages and empty supermarket shelves.  The government acknowledges that these changes could mean additional costs of £330 million a year in imports from the EU. And there is not much room for maneuver either, as the UK is now more dependent than ever on imports following an exceptionally poor harvest after heavy rain and flooding.  According to the Met Office, 1,695.9 mm of rain fell between October 2022 and March 2024, the highest amount recorded in any 18-month period in England in history since records began in 1836. Prices for products such as bread and other grain-based foods are already rising and are likely to continue to rise, according to the Agricultural and Horticultural Development Board (AHDB). Wheat production is down 15% since November, the largest reduction in acreage since 2020. Canola is down 28%, the largest reduction since the 1980s, and barley is down 22%, the largest reduction since 2020. David Eudall, AHDB's director of analysis and economics, warns that it is "possible to see a drop in wheat production from around 14 million tons to around 10 million tons or less." "With a continued reduction in production due to bad weather, costs holding up and unprofitable prices, we will continually need more imports and further expose our market for a commodity like bread to world trade."  Various farmers' associations have warned that record rainfall threatens to cause the first crop-less season for some land, as has not happened since the end of World War II, The Telegraph, the 'bible' for the Conservatives, admonishingly reckons. Climate change and a string of bad subsidy decisions for specific crops have played the biggest part, but certainly the new Brexit controls are not helping to soften the blow.  For a country that imports over 45% of its food after exports, the new post-Brexit border controls are having a big impact. The EU did do its homework and since the UK left the single market in early 2021 implemented corresponding checks on British goods coming into the bloc. However, in the UK, equivalent checks for EU imports were delayed on as many as five occasions. The latest was last year, when the government feared it would make double-digit inflation even worse.  They came into force on January 31 although, just days before, the government suddenly announced that the"full controls" on fruit and vegetables would be delayed until at least October. Analysts see this as an attempt to put the risk of shortages back on the calendar, and it will therefore be a serious problem for Labour, which is favored to form a government after the elections scheduled for the autumn. Analysts see this as an attempt to put the risk of shortages back on the timetable  The issue is that the controls entail a cost and the Conservative Executive has to somehow find the money to meet it, so, from April 30, it will begin to apply a new tax on imports of, among others, meat, fish and seafood, fruit and vegetables. Among the farmers and stockbreeders most affected by this measure are the Spanish, who, together with the French, Italians and Dutch, are the main suppliers of food to the British Isles. The amount to be paid will depend on the "risk" estimated by the British customs authorities. The amount payable will depend on the "risk" assessed by British customs authorities, according to a report by the British Department for Environment, Food and Agriculture.  Andy Topham has been a haulier for 35 years. He now resides in southern Spain and says that like many of his European-based colleagues he avoids working in the UK. "Going there is endless paperwork with too much chance of things going wrong," he recently told The Guardian. Trucks now take 35 hours to get from Rotterdam to Harwich instead of 24 hours before Brexit. From Dunkirk to Dover, it's 17 hours instead of seven.  Phil Pluck, chief executive of the Cold Chain Federation (CCF), a trade body for suppliers, has written a letter to Environment Minister Steve Barclay explaining that "many smaller UK cold chain warehouses and distributorsfound the administration too onerous and have gone out of business." Euroskeptics argue that the reduction in imports can only be good news for UK farmers because they will see increased demand for their produce. However, a combination of government farm subsidies - "ill-conceived", according to experts - and more than considerable price increases by supermarkets desperate to tackle inflation, is quietly destroying the UK farming sector.  According to Liz Webster, Cotswold farmer and founder of campaign group Save British Farming, EU farmers have been offering lower prices than UK farmers because they have had fewer labor problems and continue to receive EU subsidies. "UK pig farmers have been particularly hard hit on prices over the last three years by supermarkets and are simply going out of business," she qualifies. "He now produces 400 tons a year, of which a small part goes to the supermarkets."  While Brexit supporters like to celebrate strong export figures to the EU, these are led by gas and whiskey. But UK beef and pork exports are already down by more than 20%. According to figures from the Food and Drink Federation, the same is now true of imports: apples fell by 16.8% and oranges by 18.2%. James Smith, of Loddington Farm in Kent, used to supply 2,000 tons to supermarkets. He now produces 400 tons a year, of which a small portion goes to supermarkets. "Retailers won't pay us a profitable price for the product," he says. "It's not worth growing anymore," he adds. A subsidy program for on-farm environmental actions phased in by the Environment ministry from 2021 has been accused of undermining agriculture. "It's not about making food production more sustainable," says one farmer. "It's about taking land out of food production to achieve environmental goals," he stresses.  Wheat farmers now stand to lose at least £450/ha, whereas under SFI they can be paid a guarantee of £453/ha to plant wildflowers. Many in the industry believe that the UK's overall food self-sufficiency has fallen well below the 61% measured in 2022.  In 2011, then Prime Minister David Cameron launched a program called "Bureaucratic Challenge" and declared the need to "free up businesses to compete and create jobs." In 2021, almost exactly a decade later, Boris Johnson said that "now is the time" to start working with business to deregulate the British economy. In 2022, Rishi Sunak pledged to remove or reform "all EU legislation and bureaucracy" before the next election.  Load-Date: April 23, 2024  End of Document
