   Why Theresa May, a good MP, should never have been prime minister; Her elevation to PM did not reflect how people had voted on Brexit. Her successors were left in office, but not in power The Daily Telegraph (London) March 9, 2024 Saturday Edition 1, National Edition  Copyright 2024 Telegraph Media Group Limited All Rights Reserved  Section: NEWS; Pg. 18 Length: 1237 words Byline: CHARLES MOORE Body   It is sad that Theresa May will stand down at the next general election. She is a good constituency MP and an effective backbencher. Everyone can see that she is public-spirited and is not swayed by greed for money. She also set a good example by staying in the Commons after being forced out of Downing Street in 2019. After David Cameron (in 2016) and Boris Johnson (in 2022) resigned as prime minister, each also subsequently resigned his seat in Parliament, causing a by-election. This created a bad impression. It looked as if both men were MPs only for what they could get out of it. Their decisions contributed to the trend, first set by Tony Blair, by which being prime minister is seen not as the pinnacle of public service, but as something to bolster your CV. Mrs May was never like that. Having paid due tribute, however, I must say bluntly that Mrs May was a sadly unsuccessful prime minister, and in a way which continues to do damage. Some of this is related to her own defects as a leader. Most of it relates to something else. So I shall get the former out of the way quickly. As a leader, Mrs May was narrowgauge, mistrustful of colleagues, suspicious of talent, controlling. She shared with Margaret Thatcher a super-seriousness which was almost comical, but entirely lacked that strange combination of actress and preacher which enabled Mrs Thatcher to galvanise an audience and lead her country down her chosen path. For someone who shows no obvious signs of being conceited, Mrs May was remarkable for promoting herself rather than the party which she famously christened "nasty". Her slogan "strong and stable leadership" meant her alone. The manifesto on which she campaigned so disastrously in the 2017 general election was much happier with the words "Theresa May" than with the word "Conservative". After that empty campaign, her leadership could never be strong or stable again. Although certainly not unprincipled, in the sense of being unscrupulous, Mrs May never showed coherence in the principles she seemed to espouse. Indeed, she was always anxious to avoid discussing whatever it was she believed. We journalists used to call her "the worst lunch". She would accept our invitations, appear politely and on time, but then stubbornly refuse to engage in any conversation which might reveal anything whatever about principles, policy or politics. Did she, for example, understand the issues at stake when she sacrificed the rights of "our precious Union" to give the EU the Brexit deal it wanted in relation to Northern Ireland? Or when she supported the right to self-ID for trans people? Or how her modern slavery laws could be twisted into excuses for illegal immigrants staying in this country? Or when she tried to fight crime by reducing police numbers? Did she understand the free-market argument that an energy price cap quickly produces ridiculous distortions and stupefying costs? As she rushed to impose net zero by 2050, did she inquire whether this was necessary or what burdens it would lay upon the shoulders of the "just about managing" with whom she said she sympathised? She was a closed book, which made it hard for her to run an open society. But the bigger problem than her own defects was the choice of Mrs May as Conservative Party leader - which made her prime minister - and why that choice was made. In the 2016 referendum, the largest number of people in British history ever to have voted for anything voted to leave the EU. They naturally assumed their victory would guarantee that this would happen. Not so. Conservatives - Boris Johnson and Michael Gove - had led the Leave campaign, but the Conservative government put together by David Cameron and George Osborne had campaigned for Remain. Even though both men went, the political logic of their Brexit defeat was not followed through. So great was the establishment's horror, even in the Conservative Party, about the Brexit result that they cast about for some means of frustrating it. In Labour, this meant Sir Keir Starmer, not yet the leader, calling for a second referendum. In the Tory government, it meant finding a leader who would seek what later became known as Brino (Brexit In Name Only). Although a Remainer, Mrs May had astutely sat out the referendum dance. Once Michael Gove had stabbed Boris Johnson in the back, shortly after the referendum result, she was uniquely well placed - a leadership candidate who could scoop up most Remain votes and get the support of a sufficient number of Leavers who had no rooted objections to her. She won. Gnomically declaring that "Brexit means Brexit", she went on to prove that she, as well as the rest of us, did not know what she meant. The consequence was nearly three wasted years. After two of these, Mr Johnson resigned as foreign secretary over Mrs May's proposed Brexit deal, but it took almost another year before challenges to that deal in the Commons brought her to resign. Boris became leader, with more than twice as many MPs backing him as backed his opponent in the final round, Jeremy Hunt. He therefore entered 10 Downing Street. A constitutional crisis then ensued in which, through John Bercow's abuse of his position as Speaker, elements of the House of Commons tried to take over the government of the country. Boris overcame this and called a snap general election. Campaigning to "Get Brexit done", he got a convincing mandate - an overall majority of 80 - because most people did not want the referendum vote frustrated. Brexit did indeed get done, though imperfectly. We did leave - as, once the people had so voted, we were morally bound to do. Things soon went dramatically wrong because of Covid, but that is another story. The May disaster lay chiefly, therefore, in the fact that her appointment did not truly reflect the way people had voted in the referendum. Mrs May could have put this right by campaigning, despite her earlier Remain support, for a genuine Brexit, but this she did not do. She sought a compromise which could not be sustained. By the way, I think a comparable lesson, though with a much slower burn, can be learnt from the Scottish independence referendum of 2014. By roughly 55 to 45 per cent, Scotland said No when Alex Salmond's SNP government had campaigned for Yes. That was a defeat which the SNP has not been able to overcome. It was only much later, and under a different first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, that things really began to fall apart. But it was not expensive camper vans and photos of bewigged trans rapist prisoners which sowed the seeds of downfall. It was the much earlier defeat at the ballot box for the SNP's big idea. The party's repeated calls for indyref2 were a standing insult to referendum voters. They remain so. Therefore, the party's support declines. In the Tories' case, Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak have had to try to lead under the long shadow of the May disaster, delegitimised because the public have had no say in their appointment. I am not arguing that our constitution should insist that every new prime minister must at once be confirmed by a general election. But I do think that the party's behaviour, starting with its appointment of Mrs May over Brexit, has kept it, in Norman Lamont's famous phrase, "in office, but not in power". READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion She avoided discussing her own beliefs. She was a closed book, which made it hard for her to run an open society Graphic    To order prints or signed copies of any Telegraph cartoon, go to www.telegraph.co.uk/printscartoons or call 0191 603 0178 readerprints@telegraph.co.uk Load-Date: March 9, 2024  End of Document
