   Yousaf accused of failing to see parallels between Brexit and independence The Herald (Glasgow) March 12, 2024 Tuesday  Copyright 2024 Newsquest Media Group All Rights Reserved  Section: Pg. 4 Length: 349 words Byline: D CMS  Body   Humza Yousaf has been accused of failing to see the parallels between Brexit and independence ahead of a speech attacking Labour and the Tories over Europe. The First Minister will use a speech at the London School of Economics to claim that Scotland's public services would be £1.6billion better off if the UK was still in the EU. "Yet at Westminster there is agreement between Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer that the UK should stay out of both the EU and the huge European Single Market - whatever the cost," Mr Yousaf will say today as he makes the case for independence. However the Scottish Liberal Democrats said the upheaval of independence would be Brexit "on steroids" and that the SNP's economic credibility was "down the drain". Mr Yousaf is in London for a two-day visit that includes events with Westminster reporters and the European media, as well a podcast with LBC broadcaster James O'Brien. The main event is a live-streamed speech from the LSE this afternoon aimed at "promoting Scotland's economic potential". Titled "Building prosperity through social solidarity and economic dynamism", it will outline the continued negative impact of Brexit on the economy and Scotland's chance to "to break from the cosy Westminster no-change consensus through independence". The First Minister is expected to say the combined powers of independence and a return to EU membership would help drive up living standards. "In Scotland, I believe there is broad public agreement that Brexit has damaged the economy and public services and that it should be reversed," he will say. "The National Institute for Economic and Social Research suggests that compared to EU membership, the UK economy was 2.5% smaller in 2023, and it expects that figure to rise to 5.7% in little more than 10 years' time. "That means £69bn could have been wiped from national income in 2023. "Around 60% of spending in Scotland is on devolved services. With the same level of borrowing and taxation, that means without Brexit devolved spending power for our vital public services could have been £1.6bn higher than it is today." Load-Date: March 12, 2024  End of Document
